--- Start of Money.pdf ---
What Is Money?

Money is a system of value that facilitates the exchange of goods in an economy. Using money allows buyers
and sellers to pay less in transaction costs, compared to barter trading.

The first types of money were commodities. Their physical properties made them desirable as a medium of
exchange. In contemporary markets, money can include government-issued legal tender or fiat money, money
substitutes, fiduciary media, or electronic cryptocurrencies.

KEY TAKEAWAYS

¢ Money is a system of value that facilitates the exchange of goods.

e The use of money eliminates the problem of bartering where both parties must have something the
other wants or needs.

¢ Historically, the first forms of money were agricultural commodities, such as grain or livestock.
¢ Today, most money systems are based on standardized currencies that are controlled by central banks.
¢ Digital cryptocurrencies also have some of the specific properties of money.

How Money Works

Money is a liquid asset used to facilitate transactions of value. It is used as a medium of exchange between
individuals and entities. It's also a store of value and a unit of account that can measure the value of other goods.

Prior to the invention of money, most economies relied on bartering, where individuals would trade the goods
they had directly for those that they needed. This raised the problem of the double coincidence of wants: a
transaction could only take place if both participants had something that the other needed. Money eliminates this
problem by acting as an intermediary good.

The first known forms of money were agricultural commodities, such as grain or cattle. These goods were in
high demand and traders knew that they would be able to use or trade these goods again in the future. Cocoa
beans, cowrie shells, and agricultural tools have also served as early forms of money.

As economies became more complex, money was standardized into currencies. This reduced transaction costs by
making it easier to measure and compare value. Also, the representations of money became increasingly abstract,
from precious metals and stamped coins to paper notes, and, in the modern era, electronic records.
During World War II, cigarettes became a de facto currency for soldiers in prisoner-
of-war camps. The use of cigarettes as money made tobacco highly desirable, even
among soldiers who did not smoke.?

What Are the Properties of Money?

In order to be most useful, money should be fungible, durable, portable, recognizable, and stable. These
properties reduce the transaction cost of using money by making it easy to exchange.

Money Should Be Fungible

The word fungible refers to a quality that allows one thing to be exchanged, substituted, or returned for another
thing, under the assumption of equivalent value. Thus, units of money should be interchangeable with one
another.

For example, metal coins should have a standard weight and purity. Commodity money should be relatively
uniform in quality. Trying to use a non-fungible good as money results in transaction costs that involve
individually evaluating each unit of the good before an exchange can take place.

Money Should Be Durable

Money should be durable enough to retain its usefulness for many, future exchanges. A perishable good or a
good that degrades quickly due to various exchanges will be less useful for future transactions. Trying to use a
non-durable good as money conflicts with money's essential future-oriented use and value.

Money Should Be Portable

Money should be easy to carry and divide so that a worthwhile quantity can be carried on one's person or
transported. For example, trying to use a good that's difficult or inconvenient to carry as money could require
physical transportation that results in transaction costs.

Money Should Be Recognizable
The authenticity and quantity of the good should be readily apparent to users so that they can easily agree to the

terms of an exchange. Using a non-recognizable good as money can result in transaction costs relating to
authenticating the goods and agreeing on the quantity needed for an exchange.

Money's Supply Should Be Stable
The supply of the item used as money should be relatively constant over time to prevent fluctuations in value.
Using a non-stable good as money produces transaction costs due to the risk that its value might rise or fall,
because of scarcity or over-abundance, before the next transaction.

How Is Money Used?

Money primarily functions as the good people use for exchanges of items of value. However, it also has
secondary functions that derive from its use as a medium of exchange.

Money As a Unit of Account
Due to money's use as a medium of exchange for buying and selling and as a value indicator for all kinds of

goods and services, money can be used as a unit of account.

That means money can keep track of changes in the value of items over time and multiple transactions. People
can use it to compare the values of various combinations or quantities of different goods and services.

Money as a unit of account makes it possible to account for profits and losses, balance a budget, and value the
total assets of a company.

Money As a Store of Value
Money's usefulness as a medium of exchange in transactions is inherently future-oriented. As such, it provides a

means to store a monetary value for use in the future without having that value deteriorate.

So, when people exchange items for money, that money retains a particular value that can be used in other
transactions. This ability to function as a store of value facilitates saving for the future and engaging in
transactions over long distances.

Money As a Standard of Deferred Payment
To the extent that money is accepted as a medium of exchange and serves as a useful store of value, it can be

used to transfer value over different time periods in the form of credits and debts.

One person can borrow a quantity of money from someone else for an agreed-upon period of time, and repay a
different agreed-upon quantity of money at a future date.

Different Types of Money

Market-Determined Money

Money can originate out of the spontaneous order of markets. As traders barter for various goods, some goods
will prove more convenient than others because they have the best combination of the five properties of money
listed above.

Over time, these goods may become desirable as objects of exchange, rather than for practical use. Eventually,
people may come to desire a good solely for future trading.
Historically, precious metals such as gold and silver were often used as market-determined monies. They were
highly prized across many different cultures and societies. Today, people in cashless economies frequently turn
to cigarettes, instant noodles, or other nonperishable goods as a market-determined money substitute.

Government-Issued Currency
When a certain type of money is widely accepted throughout an economy, government bodies may begin

regulating it as a currency. They may issue standardized coins or notes to further reduce transaction costs.

A government may also recognize some money as a legal tender, meaning that courts and government bodies
must accept that form of money as a final means of payment.

Issuing money allows the government to benefit from seigniorage, the difference between the face value of a
currency and the cost to produce it.

For example, if the cost of printing a $100 bill is only $10, the government will earn a $90 profit for each bill it
prints. However, governments that rely too heavily on seigniorage may inadvertently debase their currency.

 

$18.32 Trillion

The total value of the M1 money supply in the United States as of August 2023. This is
more than a 10% reduction in MI compared to May 2022, where it stood at $20.6
Trillion. This illustrates the variable nature of the money supply.?

Fiat Currency

Many countries issue fiat currency, which is currency that does not represent any type of commodity. Instead,
fiat money is backed by the economic strength of the issuing government. It derives its value from supply and
demand and the stability of the government.

Fiat money allows the issuing government to conduct economic policy by increasing or reducing the money
supply. In the U.S., the Federal Reserve and the Treasury Department monitor several types of money supplies
for the purpose of regulating and mitigating monetary issues.

Since fiat money does not represent a real commodity, it falls to the issuing government to ensure that it meets
the five properties of money outlined above.

 

The International Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Bank serve as global watchdogs for the exchange of
international currencies.” ”’ Governments may enact capital controls or establish pegs in order to stabilize their
currency on the international market.

Money Substitutes and Fiduciary Media
To reduce the burden of carrying large quantities of currency, merchants and traders sometimes exchange money
substitutes such as written statements of debt that can be redeemed later. These statements can themselves adopt
some of the properties of money, particularly if traders use them in lieu of actual currency.

For example, ancient banks issued bills of exchange to their depositors, stating the amount that had been
deposited and the terms for redemption. Rather than withdraw money from the bank to make payments,
depositors would simply trade their bills, allowing the recipient to redeem or trade them at will.

This use of money substitutes can increase the portability and durability of money, as well as reduce the cost of
storage. However, there are risks involved with money substitutes. Banks may print more bills than they have
money to redeem, a practice known as fractional reserve banking. If too many people try to make withdrawals at
the same time, the bank may suffer from a bank run.

Fiduciary media are types of money substitutes introduced into circulation that aren't fully backed by the base
money held to back money substitutes.” For example, paper checks, token coins, and electronic credit represent
contemporary examples of fiduciary media.

Cryptocurrencies As Money

In recent years, digital currencies that do not exist in physical form, such as Bitcoin, have been introduced.
Unlike electronic bank records or payment systems, these virtual currencies are not issued by a government or
other central body. Cryptocurrencies have some of the properties of money and are sometimes used in online
transactions.

Although cryptocurrencies are rarely used in everyday transactions, they have achieved some utility as a
speculative investment or a store of value. Some jurisdictions have recognized cryptocurrencies as a payment
medium, including the government of El Salvador.

What Are the 4 Types of Money?

Money can be something determined by market participants to have value and be exchangeable. Money can be
currency (bills and coins) issued by a government. A third type of money is fiat currency, which is fully backed
by the economic power and good faith of the issuing government. The fourth type of money is money
substitutes, which are anything that can be exchanged for money at any time. For example, a check written on a
checking account at a bank is a money substitute.

What Is the Difference Between Hard and Soft Money?

Hard money is money that is based on a valuable commodity, such as gold or silver. Since the supply of these
metals is limited, these currencies are less susceptible to inflation than soft money such as printed banknotes.
With no guarantee that extra notes will not be printed, soft money may be considered risky by some.

Is Cryptocurrency Money?

Cryptocurrency has many of the properties of money and is sometimes used as a medium of exchange for
transactions. Many governments consider cryptocurrency to be a taxable asset, but very few give it the same
legal treatment as a foreign currency. Some jurisdictions, notably El Salvador, have embraced cryptocurrency.
The Bottom Line

Money is some item of value that allows people and institutions to engage in transactions that result in an
exchange of goods or services.

Money has to be exchangeable, convenient to carry, recognized as legitimate by all, physically long-lasting, and
have a value that's stable.

Money comes in various forms, including precious metals, currencies, and money
substitutes. At this time, though cryptocurrencies have some of the properties of money,
they function without a central authority and aren't backed by governments. While
cryptocurrencies (such as Bitcoin) are considered property for tax purposes by the IRS,
they aren't considered legal tender by the U.S. government.


--- End of Money.pdf ---
--- Start of Inflation and Deflation.pdf ---
Inflation vs. Deflation: An Overview

Inflation occurs when the prices of goods and services rise too much, too quickly,

while deflation occurs when those prices decrease. The balance between these two
economic conditions, opposite sides of the same coin, is delicate, and an economy can
quickly swing from one condition to the other.

Central banks keep a keen eye on the levels of price changes and act to stem inflation or
deflation by taking monetary policy actions, such as setting interest rates.

KEY TAKEAWAYS

e Inflation can occur with an increase in the prices of goods and services in an
economy.

¢ Deflation results with the general decline in prices of goods and services, and as
indicated by an inflation rate that falls below zero percent.

¢ Both can be potentially bad for the economy, depending on the underlying reasons
for them and the rate of price changes.

Inflation

Inflation is a quantitative measure of how quickly the prices of goods in an economy are
increasing. Inflation occurs when goods and services are in high demand, thus creating a
drop in availability (supply) and a consequential raising of prices. It's sometimes referred
to as too many dollars chasing too few goods.

Supply can decrease for many reasons. For example, a natural disaster can wipe out a
food crop, a housing boom can exhaust building supplies, or aggregate demand may
overwhelm inventories. Whatever the reason, consumers are willing to pay more for the
items they want, causing manufacturers and service providers to charge more.

The most common measure of inflation is the rate of increase in the consumer price index
(CPI). The CPI is a theoretical basket of goods, including consumer goods and services,

medical care, and transportation costs. The government tracks the price of the goods and
services in the basket to get an understanding of the purchasing power of the U.S. dollar.

Hyperinflation

Inflation is often seen as a big threat, mostly by people who came of age during the late
1970s, when inflation ran wild. So-called hyperinflations occur when the increase in
monthly prices exceeds 50% over some period of time.
These periods of rapid price increases are often accompanied by a breakdown in the
underlying real economy. There may also be a sudden increase in the money supply.

While hyperinflations can be scary, they are historically rare. In reality, inflation can be
either good or bad, depending on the reasons for it and the level of inflation. In fact, a
complete lack of inflation can be quite bad for the economy, as we will see below with
deflation.

A modest amount of inflation can actually encourage spending and investing, as inflation
can slowly erode the buying power of cash. So it can be relatively less expensive to buy
that $1,000 appliance today rather than in a year.

Deflation

Deflation occurs when too many goods are available or when there is not enough money
circulating to purchase those goods. As a result, the price of goods and services drops.

For instance, if a particular type of car becomes highly popular, other manufacturers start
to make a similar vehicle to compete. Soon, car companies have more of that vehicle style
than they can sell, so they must drop the price to attract buyers.

Companies that find themselves stuck with too much inventory must cut costs, which often
leads to layoffs. Unemployed individuals do not have enough money available to purchase
items. So, to coax them into buying, companies lower prices more, which continues the
downward trend.

Deflation can lead to an economic recession or depression, and central banks
usually work to stop deflation as soon as it starts.
Deflation and Credit Availability

When credit providers detect a decrease in prices, they often reduce the amount of credit
they offer. This creates a credit crunch in which consumers cannot access loans to
purchase big-ticket items. Companies are left with overstocked inventory, a situation that
then can cause further deflation.

Negative Effects

Prolonged periods of deflation can stunt economic growth and increase unemployment.
Japan's "Lost Decade" is a significant example of the negative effects of deflation.

Just as out-of-control inflation is bad, uncontrolled price declines can lead to a damaging
deflationary spiral. This situation typically occurs during periods of economic crisis, such
as a recession or depression, as economic output slows and demand for investment and
consumption dries up. This may lead to an overall decline in asset prices as producers are
forced to liquidate inventories that people no longer want to buy.

Consumers and businesses alike begin holding on to liquid money reserves to cushion
against further financial loss. As more money is saved, less money is spent, further
decreasing aggregate demand.

At this point, people's expectations regarding future inflation are also lowered and they
begin to hoard money. Consumers have less incentive to spend money today when they
can reasonably expect that their money will have more purchasing_power tomorrow.

 

Deflation is different from disinflation, which is a decline in the positive rate of
inflation from period to period.

Is Inflation Always Bad?

No, not always. Modest, controlled inflation normally won't interrupt consumer spending. It
becomes a problem when price increases are overwhelming and hamper economic
activities.

What Effect Can Deflation Have?

Decreasing demand and less spending can cause increasingly lower prices and slow the
economy. This deflation can force companies to freeze hiring or lay off workers. Wages
can decline, too.
How Does the Federal Reserve Deal With Inflation and
Deflation?

It tries to control both using its monetary policy tools. For example, it may sell Treasury
securities to increase the supply of money and encourage demand and spending in cases
of deflation or inflation that's too low. When inflation is too high, the Fed usually increases
interest rates to discourage demand, borrowing, and spending.

The Bottom Line

Most of the world's central banks target modest levels of inflation, at around 2%—-3% per
year. Higher levels of inflation can be dangerous for an economy as it causes prices of
goods to rise too quickly, sometimes in excess of wage increases.

By the same token, deflation can also be bad news for an economy. People may hoard
cash instead of spending or investing it because they expect that prices will soon be even
lower.


--- End of Inflation and Deflation.pdf ---
--- Start of Interest Rates.pdf ---
An interest rate is the amount of interest due per period, as a proportion of the amount

lent, deposited, or borrowed (called the principal sum). The total interest on an amount lent or
borrowed depends on the principal sum, the interest rate, the compounding frequency, and the length
of time over which it is lent, deposited, or borrowed.

The annual interest rate is the rate over a period of one year. Other interest rates apply over different
periods, such as a month or a day, but they are usually annualized.

The interest rate has been characterized as "an index of the preference . . . for a dollar of present

[income] over a dollar of future income".!"] The borrower wants, or needs, to have money sooner, and
is willing to pay a fee—the interest rate—for that privilege.

Influencing factors [edit]

Interest rates vary according to:

e the government's directives to the central bank to accomplish the government's goals
e the currency of the principal sum lent or borrowed

e the term to maturity of the investment

e the perceived default probability of the borrower

e supply and demand in the market

e the amount of collateral

e special features like call provisions

° reserve requirements

¢ compensating balance

as well as other factors.

Example {eait)

Acompany borrows capital from a bank to buy assets for its business. In return, the bank charges the
company interest. (The lender might also require rights over the new assets as collateral.)

A bank will use the capital deposited by individuals to make loans to their clients. In return, the bank
should pay interest to individuals who have deposited their capital. The amount of interest payment
depends on the interest rate and the amount of capital they deposited.

Related terms [eait]

Base rate usually refers to the annualized effective interest rate offered on overnight deposits by the
central bank or other monetary authority [ton needed]

The annual percentage rate (APR) may refer either to a nominal APR or an effective APR (EAPR).
The difference between the two is that the EAPR accounts for fees and compounding, while the
nominal APR does not.

The annual equivalent rate (AER), also called the effective annual rate, is used to help consumers
compare products with different compounding frequencies on a common basis, but does not account
for fees.

A discount rate?! is applied to calculate present value.
For an interest-bearing security, coupon rate is the ratio of the annual coupon amount (the coupon
paid per year) per unit of par value, whereas current yield is the ratio of the annual coupon divided by
its current market price. Yield to maturity is a bond's expected internal rate of return, assuming it will
be held to maturity, that is, the discount rate which equates all remaining cash flows to the investor (all
remaining coupons and repayment of the par value at maturity) with the current market price.

Based on the banking business, there are deposit interest rate and loan interest rate.

Based on the relationship between supply and demand of market interest rate, there are fixed interest
rate and floating interest rate.

Monetary policy [ecit)

Interest rate targets are a vital tool of monetary policy and are taken into account when dealing with
variables like investment, inflation, and unemployment. The central banks of countries generally tend
to reduce interest rates when they wish to increase investment and consumption in the

country's economy. However, a low interest rate as a macro-economic policy can be risky and may
lead to the creation of an economic bubble, in which large amounts of investments are poured into the
real-estate market and stock market. In developed economies, interest-rate adjustments are thus
made to keep inflation within a target range for the health of economic activities or cap the interest rate
concurrently with economic growth to safeguard economic momentum. SIMISIE1l7]

History [edit ]

In the past two centuries, interest rates have been variously set
either by national governments or central banks. For example, the
Federal Reserve federal funds rate in the United States has varied
between about 0.25% and 19% from 1954 to 2008, while the Bank
of England base rate varied between 0.5% and 15% from 1989 to
2009, !8l°] and Germany experienced rates close to 90% in the
1920s down to about 2% in the 2000s.!"°ll'! During an attempt to
tackle spiraling hyperinflation in 2007, the Central Bank

Getman bank interest rates
4, Tewoshoun rurtne of | one, Gu aN 80 rc

 

of Zimbabwe increased interest rates for borrowing to 800%.!'21 +
The interest rates on prime credits in the late 1970s and early Germany experienced deposit
1980s were far higher than had been recorded — higher than interest rates from 14% in 1973
previous US peaks since 1800, than British peaks since 1700, or down to almost 2% in 2003

than Dutch peaks since 1600; "since modern capital markets came
into existence, there have never been such high long-term rates"
as in this period. !"3]

Possibly before modern capital markets, there have been some accounts that savings deposits could
achieve an annual return of at least 25% and up to as high as 50%. (William Ellis and Richard Dawes,
"Lessons on the Phenomenon of Industrial Life... ", 1857, p III-IV)

Reasons for changes [eit

¢ Political short-term gain: Lowering interest rates can give the economy a short-run boost. Under
normal conditions, most economists think a cut in interest rates will only give a short term gain in
economic activity that will soon be offset by inflation. The quick boost can influence elections. Most
economists advocate independent central banks to limit the influence of politics on interest rates.
e Deferred consumption: When money is rReD
loaned the lender delays spending the
money on consumption goods. Since
according to time preference theory people
prefer goods now to goods later, in a free
market there will be a positive interest rate.

 

e Inflationary expectations: Most economies Dive
generally exhibit inflation, meaning a given
amount of money buys fewer goods in the Prime rate floats about 3% above the federal funds

future than it will now. The borrower needs to sate
compensate the lender for this.

e Alternative investments: The lender has a
choice between using his money in different .
investments. If he chooses one, he forgoes — Prime rate
the returns from all the others. Different — 10 year Treasury bond
investments effectively compete for funds. — United States Consumer Price Index

¢ Risks of investment: There is always arisk = —— Federal funds rate

that the borrower will go bankrupt, abscond,

die, or otherwise default on the loan. This

means that a lender generally charges a risk premium to ensure that, across his investments, he is

compensated for those that fail.

Liquidity preference: People prefer to have their resources available in a form that can

immediately be exchanged, rather than a form that takes time to realize.

e Taxes: Because some of the gains from interest may be subject to taxes, the lender may insist on
a higher rate to make up for this loss.

e Banks: Banks can tend to change the interest rate to either slow down or speed up economy
growth. This involves either raising interest rates to slow the economy down, or lowering interest
rates to promote economic growth.!"4]

¢ Economy: Interest rates can fluctuate according to the status of the economy. It will generally be
found that if the economy is strong then the interest rates will be high, if the economy is weak the
interest rates will be low.

=««= Credit card interest rates
==««=Auto loan interest rate 48 months new autos

Real versus nominal [eit
Main article: Real versus nominal value (economics)
Further information: Fisher equation
The nominal interest rate is the rate of interest with no adjustment for inflation.
For example, suppose someone deposits $100 with a bank for one year, and they receive interest of

$10 (before tax), so at the end of the year, their balance is $110 (before tax). In this case, regardless
of the rate of inflation, the nominal interest rate is 10% per annum (before tax).

The real interest rate measures the growth in real value of the loan plus interest, taking inflation into
account. The repayment of principal plus interest is measured in real terms compared against
the buying power of the amount at the time it was borrowed, lent, deposited or invested.

If inflation is 10%, then the $110 in the account at the end of the year has the same purchasing power
(that is, buys the same amount) as the $100 had a year ago. The real interest rate is zero in this case.
The real interest rate is given by the Fisher equation:
1+i
r=
1l+p

 
where p is the inflation rate. For low rates and short periods, the linear approximation applies:
rxi-p

The Fisher equation applies both ex ante and ex post. Ex ante, the rates are projected rates,
whereas ex post, the rates are historical.

Market rates [exit

There is a market for investments, including the money market, bond market, stock market,
and currency market as well as retail banking.

Interest rates reflect:

e The risk-free cost of capital
e Expected inflation

e Risk premium

¢ Transaction costs

Inflationary expectations [edit]

According to the theory of rational expectations, borrowers and lenders form an expectation

of inflation in the future. The acceptable nominal interest rate at which they are willing and able to
borrow or lend includes the real interest rate they require to receive, or are willing and able to pay, plus
the rate of inflation they expect.

Risk [edit]

The level of risk in investments is taken into consideration. Riskier investments such
as shares and junk bonds are normally expected to deliver higher returns than safer ones
like government bonds.

The additional return above the risk-free nominal interest rate which is expected from a risky
investment is the risk premium. The risk premium an investor requires on an investment depends on
the risk preferences of the investor. Evidence suggests that most lenders are risk-averse, "5

A maturity risk premium applied to a longer-term investment reflects a higher perceived risk of
default.

There are four kinds of risk:
¢ repricing risk
e basis risk

e yield curve risk
e optionality

Liquidity preference | ccit|

Most investors prefer their money to be in cash rather than in less fungible investments. Cash is on
hand to be spent immediately if the need arises, but some investments require time or effort to transfer
into spendable form. The preference for cash is known as liquidity preference. A 1-year loan, for
instance, is very liquid compared to a 10-year loan. A 10-year US Treasury bond, however, is still
relatively liquid because it can easily be sold on the market.
A market model [edit]

A basic interest rate pricing model for an asset is
in = tp + Pe +Tp +p

where

i, is the nominal interest rate on a given investment

i, is the risk-free return to capital

i*,, is the nominal interest rate on a short-term risk-free liquid bond (such as U.S. treasury bills).
fp is a risk premium reflecting the length of the investment and the likelihood the borrower will
default

I, is a liquidity premium (reflecting the perceived difficulty of converting the asset into money and
thus into goods).

P, is the expected inflation rate.

Assuming perfect information, p, is the same for all participants in the market, and the interest rate
model simplifies to

in =th +Tp tly

Spread [edit]

The spread of interest rates is the lending rate minus the deposit rate.!"©l This spread covers operating
costs for banks providing loans and deposits. A negative spread is where a deposit rate is higher than
the lending rate.!17]

In macroeconomics [eit]

Output, unemployment and inflation [cit]

Interest rates affect economic activity broadly, which is the reason why they are normally the main
instrument of the monetary policies conducted by central banks.!'®] Changes in interest rates will
affect firms' investment behaviour, either raising or lowering the opportunity cost of investing. Interest
rate changes also affect asset prices like stock prices and house prices, which again influence
households' consumption decisions through a wealth effect. Additionally, international interest rate
differentials affect exchange rates and consequently exports and imports. These various channels are
collectively known as the monetary transmission mechanism. Consumption, investment and net
exports are all important components of aggregate demand. Consequently, by influencing the general
interest rate level, monetary policy can affect overall demand for goods and services in the economy
and hence output and employment.!"9] Changes in employment will over time affect wage setting,
which again affects pricing and consequently ultimately inflation. The relation between employment (or
unemployment) and inflation is known as the Phillips curve.|"8]

For economies maintaining a fixed exchange rate system, determining the interest rate is also an

important instrument of monetary policy as international capital flows are in part determined by interest
rate differentials between countries.!2°

Interest rate setting in the United States [cdit]
The Federal Reserve (often referred to as

‘the Fed') implements monetary Fadaral Funds Rate (foc)

policy largely by targeting the federal funds +o el

rate (FFR). This is the rate that banks charge 0 ; eed sennee ellad add ald

 

each other for overnight loans of federal
funds, which are the reserves held by banks *

at the Fed. Until the 2007-2008 financial 4
crisis, the Fed relied on open market 2 | |
operations, i.e. selling and buying securities |

in the open market to adjust the supply of
reserve balances so as to keep the FFR 5 J | H
close to the Fed's target.*"] However, since J W
2008 the actual conduct of monetary policy ‘4 No W | |
implementation has changed considerably, \¥ nf | 5
the Fed using instead various administered a a a aS nen nn
interest rates (i.e., interest rates that are set =

directly by the Fed rather than being
determined by the market forces of supply
and demand) as the primary tools to steer
short-term market interest rates towards the

Fed's policy target,!22]

Percent
——-
==

The effective federal funds rate in the US charted over
more than half a century

Impact on savings and pensions [edit]

Financial economists such as World Pensions Council (WPC) researchers have argued that durably
low interest rates in most G20 countries will have an adverse impact on the funding positions of
pension funds as "without returns that outstrip inflation, pension investors face the real value of their

savings declining rather than ratcheting up over the next few years",[23] Current interest rates
in savings accounts often fail to keep up with the pace of inflation.!24!

From 1982 until 2012, most Western economies experienced a period of low inflation combined with
relatively high returns on investments across all asset classes including government bonds. This
brought a certain sense of complacencyl“ation needed] amongst some pension actuarial consultants
and regulators, making it seem reasonable to use optimistic economic assumptions to calculate

the present value of future pension liabilities.

Mathematical note {exit}

Because interest and inflation are generally given as percentage increases, the formulae above
are (linear) approximations.

For instance,
in = tp + Pe
is only approximate. In reality, the relationship is
(1+i,) =(1+%,)(1+ pe)
so
_ tin
1 + De

 

1,
The two approximations, eliminating higher order terms, are:

 

(l+2)(1+y)=1+a+y4+cy sl+et+y
1
Tag inate ate x1l-2z

The formulae in this article are exact if logarithmic units are used for relative changes, or equivalently
if logarithms of indices are used in place of rates, and hold even for large relative changes.

Zero rate policy {cait)

Main article: Zero interest-rate policy

A so-called "zero interest-rate policy" (ZIRP) is a very low—near-zero—central bank target interest
rate. At this zero lower bound the central bank faces difficulties with conventional monetary policy,
because it is generally believed that market interest rates cannot realistically be pushed down into
negative territory.

After the crisis of 2008, the Federal Reserve kept interest rates at zero for 12 years.!2°]

Negative nominal or real rates [ecit)

Nominal interest rates are normally positive, but not always. In contrast, real interest rates can be
negative, when nominal interest rates are below inflation. When this is done via government policy (for
example, via reserve requirements), this is deemed financial repression, and was practiced by
countries such as the United States and United Kingdom following World War II (from 1945) until the
late 1970s or early 1980s (during and following the Post-World War II economic expansion).!76ll27] In
the late 1970s, United States Treasury securities with negative real interest rates were

deemed certificates of confiscation.!7°)

On central bank reserves [ccit]

Main article: Negative interest on excess reserves

Aso-called "negative interest rate policy" (NIRP) is a negative (below zero) central bank target interest
rate.

Theory [edit]

Given the alternative of holding cash, and thus earning 0%, rather than lending it out, profit-seeking
lenders will not lend below 0%, as that will guarantee a loss, and a bank offering a negative deposit
rate will find few takers, as savers will instead hold cash.!2°!

Negative interest rates have been proposed in the past, notably in the late 19th century by Silvio
Gesell.5°l A negative interest rate can be described (as by Gesell) as a "tax on holding money"; he
proposed it as the Freigeld (free money) component of his Freiwirtschaft (free economy) system. To
prevent people from holding cash (and thus earning 0%), Gesell suggested issuing money for a limited
duration, after which it must be exchanged for new bills; attempts to hold money thus result in it
expiring and becoming worthless. Along similar lines, John Maynard Keynes approvingly cited the idea
of a carrying tax on money,'°°! (1936, The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money) but
dismissed it due to administrative difficulties.!°"] More recently, a carry tax on currency was proposed
by a Federal Reserve employee (Marvin Goodfriend) in 1999, to be implemented via magnetic strips
on bills, deducting the carry tax upon deposit, the tax being based on how long the bill had been
held,'$1]

It has been proposed that a negative interest rate can in principle be levied on existing paper currency
via a serial number lottery, such as randomly choosing a number 0 through 9 and declaring that notes
whose serial number end in that digit are worthless, yielding an average 10% loss of paper cash
holdings to hoarders; a drawn two-digit number could match the last two digits on the note fora 1%
loss. This was proposed by an anonymous student of Greg Mankiw, !°°! though more as a thought
experiment than a genuine proposal. 22!

Practice [edit]

Both the European Central Bank starting in 2014 and the Bank of Japan starting in early 2016 pursued
the policy on top of their earlier and continuing quantitative easing policies. The latter's policy was said
at its inception to be trying to "change Japan's ‘deflationary mindset." In 2016 Sweden, Denmark and
Switzerland—not directly participants in the Euro currency zone—also had NIRPs in place. |°°!

Countries such as Sweden and Denmark have set negative interest on reserves—that is to say, they
have charged interest on reserves, 41[S5IIS61[$7]

In July 2009, Sweden's central bank, the Riksbank, set its policy repo rate, the interest rate on its one-
week deposit facility, at 0.25%, at the same time as setting its overnight deposit rate at

-0.25%.!°l The existence of the negative overnight deposit rate was a technical consequence of the
fact that overnight deposit rates are generally set at 0.5% below or 0.75% below the policy

rate./S5Il5°] The Riksbank studied the impact of these changes and stated in a commentary

report!40] that they led to no disruptions in Swedish financial markets.

On government bond yields [cait)

During the European debt crisis, government bonds of ireland Bond Prices
some countries (Switzerland, Denmark, Germany, ;
Finland, the Netherlands and Austria) have been sold B |

iii

at negative yields. Suggested explanations include } iM
desire for safety and protection against the eurozone B \
breaking up (in which case some eurozone countries RH ae =
might redenominate their debt into a stronger ana aaa ae
currency).!421 Ireland bond prices, Inverted yield curve in
2011, 1411 And rates went negative after
On corporate bond yields [eit] the European debt crisis
— 15 year bond
For practical purposes, investors and academics — 10 year bond
typically view the yields on government or quasi- — 5 year bond

government bonds guaranteed by a small number of
the most creditworthy governments (United Kingdom,
United States, Switzerland, EU, Japan) to effectively
have negligible default risk. As financial theory would predict, investors and academics typically do not
view non-government guaranteed corporate bonds in the same way. Most credit analysts value them
at a spread to similar government bonds with similar duration, geographic exposure, and currency
exposure. Through 2018 there have only been a few of these corporate bonds that have traded at
negative nominal interest rates. The most notable example of this was Nestle, some of whose AAA-
rated bonds traded at negative nominal interest rate in 2015. However, some academics and investors
believe this may have been influenced by volatility in the currency market during this period

— 3 year bond


--- End of Interest Rates.pdf ---
--- Start of Budgeting.pdf ---
A personal budget (for an individual) or household budget (for a group sharing a household)!" isa
plan for the coordination of income and expenses. 2]

Purpose [edit ]

Personal budgets are usually created to help an individual or a household of people to control their
spending and achieve their financial goals. Having a budget can help people feel more in control of
their finances and make it easier for them to not overspend and to save money. |?! People who budget
their money are less likely to amass large debts, are more likely to lead comfortable lives in retirement,
and are better prepared for emergencies.

Methods of personal budgeting [ecit)

In the most basic form of creating a personal budget the person needs to calculate their net income,
track their spending over a set period of time, set goals based on the information previously gathered,
make a plan to achieve these goals, and adjust their spending based on the plan.!°! There exist many
methods of budgeting to help people do this.

50/30/20 budget [edit]

The 50/30/20 budget is a simple plan that sorts personal expenses into three categories: "needs"
(basic necessities), "wants", and savings. 50% of one's net income then goes towards needs, 30%
towards wants, and 20% towards savings.“

Pay yourself first method (80/20 budget) | [ecit]

In the pay yourself first budget people first save at least 20% of their net income, and then freely
spend the remaining 80%. They can also choose a 70/30, 60/40, or 50/50 budget for more savings.
The most important part of this method is to put one's savings apart before spending on anything
else !°

Sub-savings accounts method [ ccit]

This method is a variation of the pay yourself first budget, in which people create multiple savings
accounts, each for one specific goal (such as a vacation or a new car), and each with an amount of
money that should be reached by a specific date. They then divide the amount of money needed by
the timeline to calculate how much they should save each month_l*!lation needed]

Envelope method (cash-only budgeting) [eait]

Main article: Envelope system

For this method, people need to use cash instead of debit or credit cards. They need to allocate their
net income into categories (e.g. groceries), withdraw the cash allocated for each category, and put
them into envelopes. Any time they want to buy something in one of the categories, they only take the
designated envelope so that they cannot overspend.

Zero-based budgeting [edit]
In zero-based budgeting, all of one's net income must be allocated
ahead of spending. Zero-based budgeting involves dividing income
into different expense categories, ensuring that all funds have
been assigned a purpose, and at the end of the month there is a
zero balance in the budget. !<“ation needed]

Software [edit]

 

Several personal finance softwares and mobile apps have been
developed to help people with managing their money. Some of
them can be used for budgeting and expense tracking, others
mainly for one's investment portfolio. There are both free and paid
options.

References [edit]

=

. *"Key Differences in Household Budgeting vs. Personal
Budgeting" .US Lending Co. Retrieved 2022-04-30.

2. * "Definition of BUDGET". www.merriam-webster.com.
Retrieved 2022-04-30.

3.2 "How to Create a Budget in 6 Simple Steps" . Better Money
Habits. Retrieved 2022-04-30.

4. * Thomas, Holly (6 June 2024). "How the 50/30/20 budgeting hack

can unlock your finances" . The Telegraph.

Retrieved 31 July 2024.

 

A person using the envelope
system, putting aside money into
a ring binder of labelled plastic
envelopes

   

Personal budget in an Excel sheet

5. * Winters, Mike (24 May 2022). "If you hate budgeting, try the 80/20 rule to save money without tracking

every single expense" . CNBC. Retrieved 31 July 2024.


--- End of Budgeting.pdf ---
--- Start of Saving and Investing.pdf ---
Saving vs. Investing: An Overview

Understanding the difference between saving and investing is essential to ensure financial
security and a bright future. Though these terms are sometimes used interchangeably, it is
important to note that they are very different. Both savings and investing are critical
elements of personal finance, and starting early is a great way to set oneself up for long-
term financial stability.

In this article, we will cover what saving is, what investing is, and the pros and cons of
each, along with examples to help understand these concepts better.

KEY TAKEAWAYS

e Saving money means storing it safely so that it is available when we need it and it
has a low risk of losing value.

e Investment comes with risk, but also the potential for higher returns.

e Investing typically often comes with a longer-term horizon, such as for children's
college funds or one's retirement.

e Both saving and investing are key pieces to one's personal finances.

What Is Saving?

People save money for both purchases and in case of emergencies. Saving is an
essential part of personal finance that involves setting aside money for future use. Think of
it as putting your money in a piggy bank, but instead of an actual piggy bank, you can use
a savings account or a certificate of deposit (CD) that earns interest over time. You can
save for different reasons, such as buying a new gadget, going on a vacation, or having
an emergency fund for unexpected expenses.

Saving is an excellent way to meet short-term financial goals and prepare for unexpected
situations, such as a car repair or medical bills By putting aside money regularly, you can
build up a cushion that can help you weather tough times. Savings are generally low-risk,
meaning your money is safe, but the interest rates received are also low.

Generally speaking, short term is considered to be periods of around one year or
less. Keep in mind when you will need funds, what your plan is for the funds,
and the safety/risk associated with the goal.

Example
One example of saving is setting aside a portion of your allowance or paycheck into a
savings account every month. Let's say you want to save $1,000 for a new laptop, and
you have ten months to do so. By setting aside $100 each month, you can reach your goal
without having to pay interest on a loan or a credit card.

You can also use automatic transfers to ensure that you save consistently without having
to remember to do so manually.

Pros and Cons of Saving

Saving _has many benefits such as providing a financial safety net for unexpected events,
liquidity for purchases and other short-term goals, and being safe from loss. However,
there are also some drawbacks to consider, such as missing out on potential higher
returns from riskier investments. Savings can also lose purchasing power caused by
periods of rising inflation.

 

 

While saving is a crucial part of any financial plan, it's essential to combine it with other
forms of investing, such as retirement accounts or investing in the stock market, to
achieve a balanced approach to financial planning.

Pros and Cons of Saving

Pros Cons
Builds up an emergency fund Much lower yields
Funds short-term goals like buying May lose out to inflation
groceries, a new phone, or going on a

; Opportunity costs when not invested in
vacation. riskier but higher yielding assets
Minimal risk of loss. Savings held at

banks are protected by FDIC.
What Is Investing?

Investing is a way to grow your money over time by putting it to work in financial
instruments such as stocks, bonds, and mutual funds. Unlike saving, investing involves
taking on some risk, but it also has the potential to earn higher returns over the long term.

Investing is a way to reach long-term financial goals, such as saving for college, a down
payment on a house, or retirement. Because investing involves taking on some risk, it's
essential to choose investments that align with your goals, risk tolerance, and time
horizon. In general, the longer you can invest, the more risk you can take on, because you
have more time to ride out the ups and downs of the stock market.

For instance, let's say you want to invest in a company like Apple. By buying shares of its
stock, you own a tiny piece of the company and can benefit from its growth and profits. If
Apple performs well, the value of its stock could increase over time, allowing you to sell it
for a profit.

One important thing to remember is that investing comes with no guarantees, and there is
always the risk of losing money. For example, if Apple were to go bankrupt, your
investment could be almost worthless. That's why it's essential to diversify your portfolio
by investing in different companies and industries to reduce your risk.

Example

Using a 401(k) retirement plan is a good example of investing as it involves setting aside a
portion of your income to invest in a diversified portfolio of stocks, bonds, and other
financial instruments with the goal of growing your savings over time.

A 401(k) plan is a type of retirement account offered by many employers as a benefit to
their employees. You contribute a percentage of your salary to the plan, and your
employer may match your contribution up to a certain amount. The money you contribute
to the plan is then invested in a portfolio of mutual funds, stocks, and bonds that are
chosen by the plan administrator.

The key advantage of using a 401k retirement plan is that it offers tax benefits. The money
you contribute is deducted from your taxable income, meaning you pay less in taxes.
Additionally, the investments in your 401k grow tax-deferred, which allows your money to
grow tax free over time and potentially earn higher returns than a traditional savings
account. Taxes are not due until you start drawing money from the account. |

Investing in a 401(k) plan highlights the importance of starting to save for retirement as
early as possible. By investing consistently over time, you can benefit from compounding
returns and potentially grow your retirement savings significantly. It's also important to
choose a mix of investments that align with your risk tolerance and retirement goals, and
to regularly review and adjust your investments over time to ensure they continue to meet
your needs.

Financial experts do not recommend keeping very much of an investment
portfolio in cash, because it can create "cash drag" and lower the potential
returns of your portfolio.

Pros and Cons of Investing

Investing has the potential for higher returns than savings accounts, the ability to grow
your wealth over time through compounding and reinvestment, and the opportunity to help
you achieve long-term financial goals, such as saving for retirement or buying a house.

However, there are also some cons that should be considered. Investing always involves
some level of risk, and there is no guarantee that you will make money or even get back
what you've invested. Diversification across several holdings can help. It's important to do
your research and understand the potential risks associated with different types of
investments. Investing requires discipline and a long-term perspective, which can be
difficult for some people to maintain in the face of market volatility or the temptation to
follow the crowd in an attempt to make quick profits.

Pros and Cons of Investing

Pros Cons
Potential for higher returns than Risk of loss, especially in the short-run
savings Requires discipline and commitment

Can help achieve long-term financial
goals

May require longer time horizons

Diversification can reduce risk

When to Save and When to Invest

One of the most common questions that people ask is whether they should save or invest
their money. The answer to this question will depend on your particular financial situation,
goals, and risk tolerance.

When you are young, you may have limited income and expenses, but it's never too early
to start thinking about saving and investing. In fact, starting early can give you a significant
advantage in building wealth over time. Investing can help you fulfill long-term goals, such
as saving for college or retirement. As a young person, you have time on your side, which
means you can take more risks and invest in riskier assets. Even if you suffer losses in the
short-term, you have more flexibility to recover and benefit from the positive effects of
long-term investing. In other words, by investing early and regularly, you can take
advantage of the power of compounding, which means your money can grow
exponentially over time.

As you get older and have a shorter time horizon, experts recommend shifting out of
riskier assets like stocks and into more conservative ones like bonds and cash. This is
because short-term volatility is more of a potential risk if the market crashes just as you're
about to retire.

Even for younger individuals, saving is generally a good idea if you have short-term goals,
such as saving for a new phone, laptop, or a vacation. Saving means putting your money
into a safe and low-risk account, such as a savings account, money market account, or

a certificate of deposit (CD). Savings products generally offer low returns but they also
come with low risk. They are a good option if you need to access your money in the near
future and can't afford to lose any of it.

The Differences Between Saving and Investing

> ©

  

Involves setting money aside Includes checking accounts, savings Provides capital for
in safe, liquid accounts accounts, United States Treasury bills, investing
and money market accounts

   

Can increase capital Includes Se bonds, and Involves buying an asset in
. real estate hopes of earning a return
@ Investopedia

The Differences Between Saving and Investing.
Investopedia / Alice Morgan

Before you put any money into investments, be sure to have enough savings put
away in an emergency fund to cover several months of expenses, and enough
money in your savings account to cover all of your short-term needs like bills,
rent, and groceries.

Which is riskier, saving or investing?

By definition, saving entails very little risk. Investing, on the other hand, comes with the
risk of losing money. Therefore, investing, in general, is riskier than saving.

Why do some people prefer to save rather than invest?

Some people may choose to save rather than invest for a variety of reasons. Some people
prefer the sense of security of having more money set aside in a savings account for
unexpected expenses or emergencies. Others may have a larger number of short-term
financial goals, such as saving for a vacation or the down payment on a house, and prefer
to keep the money in a low-risk savings account. Additionally, some people may not have
the knowledge or expertise to invest, or they may not feel comfortable with the level of risk
associated with investing due to having a low risk tolerance. Finally, some people may
simply not have enough money to invest after covering their essential expenses.

How much money should be saved vs. invested?

The amount of money that should be invested versus saved depends on one's individual
financial goals, risk tolerance, and personal circumstances. A good rule of thumb is to
save enough to cover three to six months of living expenses in an emergency fund; a
savings account, with enough to cover short-term obligations like bills, and then invest the
rest. The specific amount that should be invested versus saved will thus vary depending
on factors such as age, income, existing debt, and long-term financial goals.

Why do some people fail at investing?

There are several reasons why people may struggle with investing. One common reason
is a lack of knowledge or experience, which can lead to poor investment decisions.
Additionally, emotional biases, such as fear or greed, can cause investors to make
impulsive or irrational decisions that may result in losses. Successful investing requires a
long-term perspective, discipline, and patience - and it can be difficult to stay the course
during periods of market volatility.

The Bottom Line

Saving and investing are both important components of a healthy financial plan. Saving
provides a safety net and a way to achieve short-term goals, while investing has the
potential for higher long-term returns and can help achieve long-term financial goals.
However, investing also comes with the risk of losing money. Each approach has its own
pros and cons, and it's important to find the right balance that works for your financial
situation and goals. Ultimately, a well-rounded approach that includes both saving and
investing can help build wealth, protect against financial shocks, and provide a solid
foundation for a more secure financial future.

Trade on the Go. Anywhere, Anytime SPONSORED

One of the world's largest crypto-asset exchanges is ready for you. Enjoy competitive fees
and dedicated customer support while trading securely. You'll also have access to Binance
tools that make it easier than ever to view your trade history, manage auto-investments,
view price charts, and make conversions with zero fees. Make an account for free and join
millions of traders and investors on the global crypto market.


--- End of Saving and Investing.pdf ---
--- Start of Debt Management.pdf ---
A debt management plan is a tailored strategy to help you repay outstanding debt and
financial obligations without using a new loan. Typically, credit counseling agencies work
with creditors on your behalf to determine a debt management plan that fits your financial
circumstances. Here’s how debt management plans work and how to decide if one is right
for you.

KEY TAKEAWAYS

e« Debt management plans are structured repayment plans to help you repay
outstanding debt.

e In most cases, credit counseling agencies negotiate payment plans on your
behalf.

¢ It also involves you restructuring your budget to pay off old debt, manage your
current finances, and find other ways to become financially secure.

Pros and Cons of a Debt Management Plan

A debt management plan can help reduce your debt and strengthen your finances, but it’s
not for everyone. This strategy has both upsides and downsides to keep in mind when
determining if it’s right for you. '

Pros Cons
Structured repayment plan No new credit allowed
Pay off debt sooner Takes time to complete
Potentially lower interest rates or save Not all debt is included
on fees

Pros Explained

¢ Structured repayment plan: You'll receive a tailored plan that takes into account your
specific financial situation, ensuring you'll be making payments you can afford. That
way, you can get your finances on track.

e Pay off debt sooner: With a new payment plan, you can pay off your debt sooner than
if you were to only make minimum payments or pay when you could. This can help
improve your credit score as well as save you money on the total interest you pay.

¢ Potentially lower interest rates or save on fees: When your credit counselor crafts
your plan, they may negotiate the terms of your debt. That includes working on your
behalf to lower interest rates, get charges removed, or have fees waived. This helps in
reducing the total amount you owe to your creditors.

 
Cons Explained

¢ No new credit allowed: Most debt management plans have a requirement that you
don’t open new lines of credit or loans while repaying your debt. So if you want to take
out a car loan or mortgage, you may not be able to under a debt management plan. '

e Takes time to complete: While you could pay your debt off sooner than you would
without a plan, it could still take time to pay off all your debt in full. This may hold you
back from other financial goals, like buying a home or making another large purchase.

¢ Not all debt is included: While some of your creditors may agree to your plan, not all
of them will—nor are they required to. This means while you might have a structured
plan for some of your outstanding debt, it may not include all of it. For instance, credit
card debt may be included, but home or auto loans may have to be paid separately.

2

How Debt Management Plans Work

Credit counseling agencies review your finances and then help you negotiate and
potentially reduce your outstanding debt. You'll make one monthly payment to the agency,
and then they will pay your creditors. Generally, you will have to pay an initial and monthly
fee.

With a debt management plan, it can take a few years until all your outstanding debt is
paid in full. You usually won’t be able to open new lines of credit or take out new loans,
including credit cards, auto loans, and mortgages while under the plan. In some cases,
you may have to close your accounts.

Eligibility for a Debt Management Plan

Not all debt is eligible for a debt management plan. Often, only unsecured debt, such as
personal loans or credit card debt, is eligible for a debt management plan. Other types of
debt, like a mortgage or auto loan that are backed by collateral, may not qualify.
Creating and Implementing a Debt Management Plan

Not all credit counseling agencies are accredited and trustworthy. If a company is
promising quick results and requires an upfront payment, look elsewhere. You can often
find a nonprofit credit counseling agency through your bank or local consumer protection
agency. A good counselor will spend significant time reviewing your personal situation and
offer you several options.

 

Here are the main steps to take to establish a debt management plan with a reputable
credit counseling agency: *

Check eligibility: Consult with a credit counseling agency to see if you’re a good fit for a
debt management plan. A credit counselor will review your financial situation to see if
you can qualify. Even if a debt management plan isn’t the right fit for you, a credit
counselor should help you find other debt relief options and offer you educational
resources.

Create a debt management plan: Your counselor will craft a plan that fits your finances.
You'll make one payment every month to the credit counseling agency, which will
distribute it to all of your outstanding creditors. That amount may include an
administrative fee for your counselor. Read over your agreement to make sure it
actually suits your needs before you agree to anything.

Put your plan to work: Your agency will contact creditors and lenders on your behalf
and negotiate outstanding fees or charges to try to lower the total amount you owe.
While not all creditors are required to agree with the negotiations, your credit
counseling agency will work on compromises.

Pause or cancel credit obligations: You'll likely have to close any credit cards that are
in your debt management plan. You may also have limited access to opening up new
lines of credit or loans.

Make your payments: You'll make monthly payments as required. It could take a few
years to repay all of your outstanding debt, depending on the size of your debt and
payments.

Is a Debt Management Plan Right for You?

You might want to get a debt management plan if:

« You have a lot of outstanding unsecured debt, like credit card debt.

You're carrying a lot of debt with high interest or fees.

e You are making minimum payments, but your debt is not decreasing due to interest.
e You have trouble making minimum payments on your outstanding debt each month.

You may want to look into other types of debt relief if:
e You have secured debt or other types of debt that wouldn’t qualify for a debt
management plan.

e You have some credit card debt but can afford the minimum payments every month.

« You want to make a large purchase within the next few years, like a home or car.

You aren't ready to stop using credit cards.

Alternatives to Debt Management Plans

While debt management plans can offer significant help with reducing your debt, they are
not necessarily the best solution for everyone. Consider some alternatives as you work on
your debt repayment strategy.

Debt Consolidation

If you have many different types of outstanding debt, like credit cards and secured loans,
you may want to try debt consolidation.

Debt consolidation is when you take out a loan to pay off your outstanding debt and then
make payments on your new loan. This may be helpful if you know how much to borrow
as a lump sum and can get a lower interest rate than what you’re paying right now on your
outstanding debt.

 

If you have credit card debt, you may want to look into 0% annual percentage rate

(APR) balance transfer credit cards. With a balance transfer, you move over funds from
one credit card (or more) onto a card that has a promotional 0% APR for a set amount of
months, such as 12 or 24 months. With no interest growing on your balance, you can pay
off your credit card faster because your full payment will go toward your principal. You'll
also save more in total interest.

If your new credit card or loan limit won’t cover all your outstanding debt, you'll
have to repay both your new card and any remaining amount that didn’t transfer
over

Bankruptcy

If your debt is too much to handle, you may want to explore bankruptcy. While bankruptcy
won't wipe out all your debt obligations, it could help get it restructured and set up a
repayment plan.

There are a few different options for bankruptcy, including Chapter 7 and Chapter 13.
Chapter 7 is liquidation, where all your assets are liquidated to pay off your outstanding
debt. Some other debts may be wiped out completely. Chapter 13 reorganizes your debt,
but you'll get to keep your assets, such as your home, in the process.

 

 
Chapter 7 can take a few months to get through, whereas Chapter 13 could take a few
years to finish. A bankruptcy can stay on your credit report for seven—10 years, depending
on the option you choose.

 

What Are the Benefits of a Debt Management Plan?

Debt management plans can help you implement a strategy to repay a large amount of
debt. You'll receive tailored advice and support for your financial circumstances. Your
interest rate may also be reduced or fees may be waived to help lessen the total amount
you owe.”

Will a Debt Management Plan Hurt My Credit?

A debt management plan can hurt your credit in a few different ways. You might be
required to close some credit cards while you’re in a debt management plan. Closing
accounts can lessen your total credit history and your total credit utilization, which causes
your score to drop.°

What Are the Alternatives to Debt Management Plans?

Rather than getting a debt management plan, you can look into alternatives like a debt
consolidation loan, a balance transfer credit card, or even bankruptcy. If none of those are
viable options for you, look into setting up your own debt repayment plans, using
strategies like the debt avalanche or debt snowball. Or, you could take a do-it-yourself
approach by negotiating with your creditors directly, instead of using a credit counseling
agency.

The Bottom Line

A debt management plan can provide substantial debt relief to many people without the
need for a new loan, but it’s not necessarily the best option for everyone. The best method
for reducing your debt load will depend on a number of factors, including your income,
amount of debt, and credit score. Weigh the pros and cons of all your options for paying
off debt, perhaps with the help of a financial advisor, before you determine which one is
best for you


--- End of Debt Management.pdf ---
--- Start of Tax Planning.pdf ---
Every individual needs to pay taxes on their income. Based on the provisions of the Income-tax Act, these taxes need to be paid. As
income increases, the rate of paying taxes also increases. Tax Planning is a basic yet integral part of financial planning. Tax planning

helps an individual to reduce tax liability and helps save more of their capital.

Year-end is when you will hear about the term “Tax Planning” a lot. Planning taxes at the last moment often leads to incorrect

investment decisions. Hence, it is always recommended to plan taxes at the beginning of the year rather than at the last moment.

 

Contents
What is Tax Planning?
What are the objectives of tax planning?
What are the types of Tax Planning?
What are the steps to follow while planning the taxes?
How to save taxes in India with the help of Tax Planning?

FAQs

What is Tax Planning?

Tax Planning Meaning:

Tax planning is an essential part of financial planning and involves analyzing your financial situation, identifying tax-saving
opportunities, and implementing strategies to reduce your tax liability. By minimizing your tax burden, you can increase your
disposable income and allocate more resources toward achieving your financial goals. Effective tax planning requires a thorough
understanding of tax laws and regulations and an awareness of current and potential changes to the tax code. In the excerpt below, we

will help you with tax planning tips to maximize your tax savings while complying with all applicable laws and regulations.

What are the objectives of tax planning?

Tax planning is important for several reasons. Here are some of the key objectives of tax planning

Minimizing tax liability: Tax planning aims to reduce the amount of tax that an individual or business owes by taking

advantage of all available deductions, credits, exemptions, and other tax-saving opportunities.

Manage Cash Flow: Effective tax planning allows you to anticipate and prepare for tax payments, avoiding any financial
strain or disruption to your cash flow.

Plan for Life Changes: Major life events like marriage, divorce, the birth of a child, or starting a business can significantly

impact your taxes. Planning helps you adapt your strategy and minimize tax implications during these transitions.
Invest Strategically: Understanding the tax implications of different investment options allows you to choose those that
optimize your after-tax returns.

Optimize Business Operations: Businesses can benefit from tax planning by maximizing deductions, minimizing taxable
income, and understanding the tax implications of business decisions.

Maximizing tax efficiency: Tax planning seeks to optimize the use of tax-advantaged investment vehicles and strategies,
such as retirement plans, tax-deferred accounts, and tax-exempt investments.

Achieving financial goals: Tax planning is an integral part of financial planning and helps individuals and businesses achieve
their financial objectives by minimizing taxes and maximizing after-tax returns.

Ensuring compliance: Tax planning also involves ensuring compliance with all applicable tax laws and regulations to avoid
penalties, fines, and other legal consequences.

Managing risk: Tax planning also involves assessing and managing tax-related risks, such as the risk of an audit, and taking
steps to mitigate those risks.

What are the types of Tax Planning?

Tax planning can be categorized into different types based on various criteria. Here are some common types of tax planning:

1. Short-term tax planning: This type of tax planning involves taking actions to minimize taxes in the current tax
year. It may include deferring income or accelerating deductions to reduce tax liability in the current year.

2. Long-term tax planning: Long-term tax planning involves taking actions to reduce taxes over a longer period,
typically several years or more. It may include strategies such as retirement planning, estate planning, or
investment planning.

3. Permissive tax planning: This type of tax planning involves taking advantage of tax breaks or incentives
provided by the government to reduce tax liability. Examples include tax deductions for charitable donations or
tax credits for energy-efficient investments.

4. Purposive tax planning: Purposive tax planning involves structuring financial transactions or investments to
minimize tax liability. It may involve using legal tax loopholes or tax shelters to reduce taxes.

5. Marginal tax planning: Marginal tax planning involves analyzing the impact of additional income or deductions
on the taxpayer's marginal tax rate. The goal is to identify the optimal level of income or deductions to minimize
taxes.

6. Structural tax planning: Structural tax planning involves reorganizing a business or personal finances to
maximize tax efficiency. Examples include changing the legal structure of a business or using offshore accounts
to reduce tax liability.

If you need to plan and manage your taxes, our Tax Advisory Service can be your best bait to save more taxes so you can keep more

of what you earn. Book Consultation Today!

What are the steps to follow while planning the taxes?
1. Start Early-It is generally advisable to start tax planning as early as possible rather than waiting until the last
minute. Tax planning involves taking advantage of deductions and credits, contributing to retirement accounts,
and making charitable donations, among other strategies. By starting early in the year, individuals can ensure
they are on track to meet their financial goals while minimizing their tax liability.

2. Assess your tax situation: The first step in tax planning is to assess your tax situation, including your income,
expenses, and deductions. This will help you determine your tax liability and identify areas where you can reduce
your taxes.

3. Identify tax-saving opportunities: The next step is to identify tax-saving opportunities such as deductions, credits,
and exemptions that taxpayers can use to lower their tax liability.

4. Develop a tax-saving strategy: Based on your tax situation in Step 1 and the available tax-saving opportunities in
Step 2, you can develop a tax-saving strategy that minimizes your tax liability and maximizes tax efficiency.

5. Implement your tax-saving plan: Once you have developed a tax-saving plan, you need to implement it by taking
action to reduce your taxes. This may involve investing, donating to charity, or structuring your business finances
tax-efficiently.

6. Monitor your tax situation: Tax laws and regulations can change over time, so it's important to monitor your tax
situation regularly and make adjustments as needed to ensure that your tax plan remains effective.

How to save taxes in India with the help of Tax Planning?

In India, there are several ways in which individuals can save income tax through tax planning. Here are some strategies that
individuals can use to minimize their tax liability:

1. Invest in tax-saving instruments: Tax planning is about how wisely you invest in the right instruments to
achieve your financial goals. The following sections under the Income Tax Act offer tax deductions and
exemptions to reduce your tax liabilities. The deductions are available from Sections 80C through to 80U and
can be claimed by eligible taxpayers.

Sections Income Tax Deduction for FY Who can Invest? Maximum
2022-23((AY 2023-24) deduction available
for FY 2022-23 (AY
2023-24)
Section 80C Investing into very common and Individual Upto Rs 1,50,000
popular investment options like Or
LIC, PPF, Sukanya Samriddhi HUF

Account, Mutual Funds, FD,
child tuition fee, ULIP etc

Section 80CCC Investment in Pension Funds Individuals
Section 80CCD (1) Atal Pension Yojana and Individuals
National Pension Scheme
Contribution
Section 80CCD(1B) Atal Pension Yojana and Individuals Upto Rs 50,000

National Pension
Section 80CCD(2)

Section 80D

Section 80DD

Section 80DDB

Section 80E

Section 80EE

Section 80EEA

Section 80EEB

SchemeContribution (additional
deduction)

National Pension

SchemeContribution by
Employer

Medical Insurance Premiums,
preventive health checkups,
and Medical Expenditure

Medical Treatment of a
Dependent with Disability

Medical expenditure for

treatment of Specified Diseases

Interest paid on Loan taken for
Higher Education

Interest paid on Housing Loan

Interest Paid on Housing Loan

Interest paid on Electric Vehicle
Loan

Individuals

Individual
Or

HUF
Individual

Or
HUF

Individual
Or
HUF

Individual

Individual

Individual

Individual

Amount
Contributed

or

14% of Basic
Salary + Dearness
Allowance (in case
the employer is
Government)

10% of Basic
Salary+ Dearness
Allowance(in case
of any other
employer)

- Whichever is
lower

Upto Rs 1,00,000

Normal Disability
(at least 40% or
more but less than
80%): Rs 75000/-
Severe Disability
(at least 80% or
more): Rs 125000/-

Senior Citizens:
Upto Rs 1,00,000
Others: Upto Rs
40,000

No limit (Any
amount of interest
paid on education
loan)upto 8
assessment years

Upto Rs 50,000
subject to some
conditions

Upto Rs 1,50,000/-
subject to some
conditions

Upto Rs 1,50,000
subject to some
Section 80G

Section 80GG

Section 80GGA

Section 80GGB

Section 80GGC

Section 80RRB

Section 80QQB

Section 80TTA

Donation to specified

funds/institutions. Institutions

Income Tax Deduction for

House Rent Paid

Donation to Scientific Research

& Rural Development

Contribution to Political Parties

Individuals on Contribution to

Political Parties

Royalty on Patents

Royalty Income of Authors

Interest earned on Savings

Accounts

All Assessee
(Individual, HUF,
Company etc)

Individual

All assessees
except those who
have an income
(or loss) from a
business and/or a
profession

Companies

Individual
HUF
AOP

BOl

Firm

Individuals (Indian
citizen or foreign
citizen being
resident in India)

Individuals (Indian
citizen or foreign
citizen being
resident in India)

Individual
Or

conditions.

100% or 50% of the
Donated amount or
Qualifying limit:
Allowed donation in
cash upto
Rs.2000/-

Rs. 5000 per month
25% of Adjusted
Total Income

Rent paid - 10% of
Adjusted Total
Income

- whichever is lower

100% of the
amount donated.
Allowed donations
in cash upto
Rs.10,000/-

100% of the
amount contributed
No deduction
available for
contributions made
in cash

100% of the
amount
contributed.

No deduction is
available for
contributions made
in cash.

Rs.3,00,000/-

Or

Specified Income

- whichever is lower

Rs.3,00,000/-

Or

Specified Income

- whichever is lower

Upto Rs 10,000/-
HUF (except
senior citizen)

Section 80TTB Interest Income earned on Individual (60 yrs Upto Rs 50,000/-
deposits(Savings/ FDs) or above)
Section 80U Disabled Individuals Individuals Normal Disability:
Rs. 75,000/-
Severe Disability:
Rs. 1,25,000/-

Claim deductions for expenses: Individuals can claim tax deductions for certain expenses such as home loan
interest, medical expenses, donations to charity, tuition fees, etc. These deductions can be claimed under
various sections of the Income Tax Act.

Opt for tax-exempt allowances: Some allowances, such as House Rent Allowance (HRA), Leave Travel

Allowance (LTA), and conveyance allowance, are tax-exempt up to a certain limit if the taxpayer submits the
required proof.

Split income with family members: Individuals can split their income with family members such as spouses or
children in lower tax brackets. This can be done by investing in their names, making them a nominee in
investments, etc.

Consider tax implications before making investments: Individuals should consider the tax implications before
making any investments. For example, long-term capital gains from equities and equity mutual funds are tax-
exempt up to Rs 1 lakh, but any gains above that are taxed at 10%.

Use the tax calculator: Individuals can use the online tax calculator or Tax2win Income Tax calculator, which
helps them to calculate their tax liability and plan investments accordingly


--- End of Tax Planning.pdf ---
--- Start of Insurance.pdf ---
Insurance is the most effective risk management tool which can protect individuals and businesses
from financial risks arising out of various contingencies. The emotional and psychological loss can
never be compensated, but at least the financial loss can be compensated with insurance. Though
there are uncertainties in life which you cannot mitigate, but insurance will surely help you transfer the
financial risk associated with the same.

What is the Insurance — Insurance Meaning and Definition

So, What do you mean by insurance? Insurance meaning is a legal contract between two parties —
the insurance company (insurer) and the individual (insured), wherein the insurance company
promises to compensate for financial losses due to insured contingencies in return for the premiums
paid by the insured individual.

In simple words, insurance is a risk transfer mechanism, where you transfer your risk to the insurance
company and get the cover for financial loss that you may face due to unforeseen events. And the
amount that you pay for this arrangement is called premium. There is insurance available for various
risks, starting from your life to mobile phones that you use. In the end, it’s essential to protect what is
‘important’ to you.

How does an Insurance Policy Work?

The concept of insurance works on the basis of ‘risk pooling’. When you buy any type of insurance
policy from the insurance company for a specified period with specific cover, you will make regular
payments (referred to as premiums) towards the policy. Similarly, Insurance Company collects
premium from all of its clients (referred to as insured) and pools the money collected to pay for losses
arising out of an insured event. In case the insured event takes place, and you make a claim, losses
will be compensated by the insurance company from the pool of policyholder’s premiums. In case you
don’t make a claim during the specified policy period, no benefits will be paid to you. However, there
are various types of products offered by insurance companies today which also involve savings
element attached to it.

What is the Deductible in Insurance?

Deductible refers to the amount of the claim that is incurred by the policyholder. The deductible
amount, as the name suggests, is the amount that is deducted from the claim amount of an insurance
policy. For instance, if the agreed deductible is INR 20,000 and the claim raised by the policyholder is
%40,000 then the insurance company will only pay INR 20,000 to the policyholder. This, in turn,
specifies that if only the claim amount exceeds the deductible amount, the insurance company will pay
you.

The higher the deductibles, the lower is the premium of the particular insurance plan and vice-versa.
Deductibles play a vital role in deciding the practicality of your future claims. So, it is vital to pay
utmost heed when deciding the deductibles for your insurance plan.

Key Features of Insurance

Insurance policies are the much-needed support pillar one requires at the time of need. The salient
features of insurance are
1. Easy to purchase: One of the features of an insurance policy is its ease of purchase. Due to the
widespread use of the internet, people can now easily purchase a policy by sitting in their comfort
zone. Most insurance companies provide the option of both online and offline purchases of the policies
so people can choose as per their comfort.

2. A partner in a financial crisis: The basic purpose of an insurance policy is to provide financial
help when in need. Be it health, vehicle, or any other insurance policy, the aim is to extend the
monetary aid.

3. Abundant options: The current insurance market is full of a number of options. A customer need
not stick to a few options. There is great flexibility to surf all the options available and then make the
final decision.

4. Benefits of insurance: One insurance policy provides a number of benefits. Right from providing
financial coverage to tax benefits and so on, insurance cover provides wide coverage.

5. Offers: There are several occasions when the insurance company provide offers for the
policyholder. It may be a reduction in the renewal amount or anything as such. No claim bonus is also
a happy moment. It is the bonus provided for making no claims in a policy year.

6. Insurance for every precious thing: There is the facility of insurance for almost all precious and
luxury things. Apart from the life insurance, you can get a cover for your vehicle, home, mobile,
jewellery, etc.

7. Acover for family: Insurance policies are not limited to covering only one person. When it comes
to a life insurance policy, several plans allow a policyholder can get their whole family covered.

8. The ease of insurance premium calculator: Almost all the insurance companies provide the easy
of insurance premium calculator. An individual can calculate the lumpsum premium he will have to pay
in lieu of the insurance cover. It makes it easier for the customers to decide their deal.

Types of Insurance available in India

There are various types of insurance products available in India. Mainly, insurance products are
classified as:

e Life insurance products
e General insurance products

Life insurance covers you against the risk of death. Life insurance policies come in many variants such
as term plans, endowment plans, whole life insurance plans, money back plans and unit-linked
investment plans etc. Many life insurance products can be a great tool for long-term savings also as it
comes as a combination of protection and savings. General insurance products cover financial losses
caused by various risks other than death. General insurance products come in various types covering
a wide range of risks such as health insurance, motor insurance, marine insurance, liability insurance,
travel insurance and commercial insurance etc.

 

Insurance is an effective risk management tool that protects what is precious for us —life, health, home
and businesses etc. The requirement of insurance may vary from one individual to another, but there
are certain types of insurance products that are must-have for every individual for ensuring a secure
future.

Must-have Insurance Products

Knowing the importance of insurance is the need of the hour. Following insurance products are the
must-have for any individual today.

Life insurance

As no one wants to leave their loved ones financially shattered, life coverage is one of the must-have
for every individual having dependents. In case of life insurance, the sum assured or the coverage
amount will be paid out to the nominee of the insured in the event of the death of the insured. Life
insurance is a crucial requirement to ensure the financial well-being of your loved ones even in your
absence. The coverage amount opted should be able to provide complete financial protection — to
replace income loss, to repay debt and also to create a financial buffer that can be utilised by insured’s
family for future financial stability. Though life insurance products come in many variants, it’s important
to first avail the term insurance with adequate coverage.

Health insurance

Health uncertainties are part of life. Keeping in mind the rising cost of healthcare and an increasing
number of diseases, it’s important to have the financial cushion to protect yourself against health
contingencies. Health insurance policies are of many types such as individual health insurance, family
floater health insurance, critical illness health insurance and senior citizen health insurance. It’s
important to have adequate health insurance coverage that can protect you from financial crisis during
medical emergencies.

Motor insurance

Motor insurance policies are the mandatory legal requirement in India for every vehicle owner under
the Motor Vehicle Act. Be it two-wheeler, car or a commercial vehicle, its compulsory to avail third
party liability motor insurance to protect oneself against the claims that may arise from another party
during an accident. However, motor insurance policies come in a comprehensive package wherein
your valuable assets (bike or car) are covered against the various risk of damage or loss along with
the personal accidental cover to you as the owner. Keeping in mind the rising incidents of road
accidents and the asset value, it’s most important to have a comprehensive motor insurance policy.

Accident and disability insurance

Accidents are unexpected and are inevitable. Sometimes accidents can result in disabilities that can
further have huge impact on your earning capacity. In order to have financial stability for yourself and
your family, it’s important to be insured against accidents.

Home insurance

Home is one of your most valuable possessions that also includes many precious belongings and
memories. Though you try to secure it to the fullest, your property is exposed to various risks like theft,
damages due to natural disasters etc. which you may not be able to mitigate completely. Hence, in
order to protect your home against losses and damages that may arise due to many insurable events,
availing home insurance is the most effective solution.

Though you need to be prepared for future uncertainties by availing insurance cover, you may not
need all types of insurance. The priority of any insurance product may vary depending on your
individual need. Insurance is a large industry with numerous product types available to cater to every
sort of need. Some of them mentioned already are of top priority for every individual. Priority of rest
other types of insurance may purely depend on your unique need or situation. Let’s take a look at
some of the insurance types that are of lesser priority.

Standalone critical illness insurance

Critical illness insurance plan may not be needed for every individual, specifically, if you do not have
any family history of critical illness. Critical illnesses are sometimes covered in health insurance plans
and also comes as a rider along with life insurance plans. Hence, a standalone cover for critical illness
depends purely on the requirement of an individual.

Travel insurance

Travel insurance may be the priority for frequent travellers. But, it may not be needed for all. The need
for insurance may vary depending on each individual’s unique needs. For example, if you are planning
a domestic trip and your comprehensive health insurance plan covers you across the country for any
medical emergencies, travel plans may not just be needed for you. More specifically, the travel
insurance plan may not be your priority if you can afford to lose your pre-paid trip expenses.
Sometimes travel covers also come as your credit card travel benefit.

Likewise, there are many insurance types that are not suitable or required for every individual. It’s
important to think about the benefits that you can reap before investing in an insurance plan.

How to Ddecide on the Type of Insurance You Need?

Before you buy any insurance, it’s important to understand the need for insurance. Here are certain
things to keep in mind at the time of deciding what type of insurance you need.

Purpose of cover

Risks that you want to be covered against
How long you might need the coverage
Affordability

Components of Life Insurance:

When trying to learn what insurance is, it is important to understand its different components. Now that
you have gone through the insurance meaning, take a look at some of its components too:

1. Long-lasting coverage: When it comes to life insurance definition, coverage is an important
component. Life insurance coverage can be permanent and last a lifetime. There are policies that
can cover you till the time you turn 100 years, making it a secure way of leaving a legacy behind.

2. Death benefit: The worry of your family being financially vulnerable in your absence can be a
major concern for the primary earner. The death benefit helps build a safety wall around your
family that would help them manage their lives comfortably without compromising on their dreams
and aspirations.
3. Levelled premiums: One of the most important components of your life insurance policy is the
premium. The premium depends on the chosen sum assured, the frequency of premium payment,
and the policy’s tenure. However, a great feature of a life insurance policy is that the premium
remains constant throughout the term of the policy. It is, therefore, often recommended that life
insurance should be purchased as early in life as possible.

4. Maturity benefit: A number of life insurance policies come with the option of a maturity benefit,
where a maturity benefit is payable if the insured individual survives the policy term. Thus, the
policy acts as an investment vehicle that offers guaranteed and/ or non-guaranteed benefits.

5. Liquidity: Comprehensive life insurance plans also allow liquidity in partial withdrawals in Unit
Linked Plans or loans against the collected surrender value post a specified policy period for
Endowment Plans. This makes your policy act as an emergency fund that you may use in case you
need some financial help.

List of Benefits and Importance of Insurance

Insurance is a risk management tool not only benefits the individual and businesses but also benefits
the society and economy in numerous ways. Following are some of the important benefits of
insurance:

1. Provides peace of mind: Insurance provides protection against various uncertainties that can put
you or your family in financial crisis. By covering the uncertainties of human life and businesses,
insurance provides a sense of security. Having life insurance gives you peace of mind that the
financial stability of your family will remain intact even when you are not around. Having health
insurance gives you a sense of security that you do not need to shell out all your savings in the
event of medical emergencies.

2. Promotes risk control: As insurance works on risk transfer mechanism, it promotes risk control
activity.

3. Promotes economic growth: As insurance funds are invested in various projects like water
supply, power and roads etc, it contributes to the overall economic growth of the nation. Also,
insurance provides employment opportunity to people. Insurance contributes to economic growth
in many other ways such as getting Foreign Direct Investment, paying taxes on the profit earned
and by investing in the capital market etc.

4. Distribution of risk: Risk of insurance is spread across various individuals and organisation
instead of concentrating on only one.

5. Helps to get loan easily: There are loan facilities offered against insurance policies. In case of
home loans, having an insurance cover can help to get the loan easily from the lender.

6. Inculcates savings habit: There are many life insurance products that come with investment cum
protection benefit. Such products inculcate a regular saving habit among individuals. Plans like
endowment insurance plans help in achieving long-term financial goals. Pension plans help to
receive regular income flow in older age.

7. Provides tax benefit: Insured gets the tax benefits for premium paid depending on the insurance
product type. For example, the premium paid towards life insurance plans qualifies for tax
deduction under Section 80C of the Income Tax Act. And, the premium paid towards health
insurance plans qualifies for tax deduction under Section 80D of the Income Tax Act.

8. Financial safety for the family: One of the biggest benefits of having insurance is that you can
safeguard your family. For example, a life insurance policy pays out a lump sum death benefit to
your loved ones in case of your death, which can help them sustain a comfortable livelihood.

9. Safety of financial status: The right insurance policy can assure your safety if an unforeseen
accident brings financial burdens on you. Be it your own safety or the safety of your business,
property or valuables, in case of a mishap; you would not have to dig up your hard-earned savings.

10. Wealth creation goals: In the case of a comprehensive life insurance plan, you receive a maturity
benefit at the time of maturity. This amount, generally received in a lump sum, can be very helpful
in fulfilling a number of financial requirements. For example, as a retirement fund, money to buy a
house, go on a foreign holiday or pursue your hobbies.

11. Wealth preservation: An insurance policy can be instrumental in managing and safeguarding your
financial future. Suitable plans can help in reducing the risk element in your financial portfolio. It
can eliminate uncertainties or offer you the funds to manage them without disturbing your savings.

12. Wealth distribution When more and more people opt for insurance, the insurance ecosystem gets
help at large. It helps in spreading out the risk, thus making the insurance premiums more
affordable for everyone.

Following are some of the examples that demonstrate the importance of insurance:

e Case 1:
Ram, a software engineer living in Bangalore meets with an accident and dies on the spot leaving
his wife and son in deep emotional shock. He was just 40! He also has a home loan of INR. 30
lakhs running. Luckily, Ram has taken a term insurance cover of INR. 1 Cr. at the age of 32 years
for 25 years of the policy tenure. His wife received compensation from the insurance company
within 10 days which helped her pay off the debt and invest the corpus for future needs. If he had
not taken the wise decision of investing in life insurance, his family would have been a huge
financial crisis today! Insurance is important to secure your family’s future.

e Case 2:
Sunil, an employee in a multinational company in Mumbai suddenly fell unconscious due to high
fever. He was then rushed to the nearest hospital. He was admitted for 3 days in the hospital for
diagnosis and treatment. When he was discharged after 3 days, his hospital bill came up to
around INR. 70,000. Luckily, he had taken a health insurance coverage for INR. 3, 00,000. As the
hospital was listed in the network hospitals of his insurer, bills were directly settled to the hospital.
If he had not known the importance of insurance, he would have to pay INR.70, 000 out of his
pocket. Insurance helps you to have financial stability during unforeseen events.

To conclude, shield your life and important assets against all the uncertainties with the help of
insurance. Know what insurance coverages you need, compare and invest wisely. It’s important to
understand that the need for insurance is to secure what you love


--- End of Insurance.pdf ---
--- Start of Retirement.pdf ---
What Is Retirement Planning?

Creating a retirement plan begins with determining your long-term financial goals and
tolerance for risk, and then starting to take action to reach those goals. The process can
begin any time during your working years, but the earlier the better.

The process of creating a retirement plan includes identifying your income sources, adding
up your expenses, putting a savings plan into effect, and managing your assets. By
estimating your future cash flows, you can judge whether your retirement income goal is
realistic.

Needless to say, a retirement plan is not a static document. You'll need to update it from
time to time as well as review it to monitor your progress.

KEY TAKEAWAYS
e It is never too early or too late to start a retirement plan.

e Aretirement plan is a strategy for long-term saving, investing, and finally
withdrawing money you accumulate to achieve a financially comfortable
retirement.

¢ Akey part of a retirement plan is taking advantage of one of the government-
approved investment vehicles, such as an individual retirement account (IRA) ora
401(k) account, which offer tax advantages to retirement savers.

e Your retirement plan needs to take into account your estimated future expenses,
liabilities, and life expectancy.

What Is a Retirement Plan?

A retirement plan may be seen as a roadmap to a comfortable life after work.
It entails accumulating enough money to pay for the lifestyle you want to
enjoy in the future. Your retirement plan may well change over time, but the
earlier you get started the better.
>

8 Essential Tips For Retirement Saving

How Retirement Planning Works

A retirement plan is your preparation for a good life after you're done working to pay the
bills, or at least done working a full-time job. But it's not all about money.

The non-financial aspects include lifestyle choices such as how you want to spend your
time in retirement and where you'll live. A holistic approach to retirement planning
considers all these areas.

The goals for your retirement plan will change in focus over time:

¢ Early in a person’s working life, your contribution to retirement savings may be modest.
The reward is 40-plus years of investment growth.
e During the middle of your career, when your income may be at its peak, you might set
specific income or asset targets and take steps toward achieving them.

e Once you reach retirement age, you go from accumulating assets to what planners call
the distribution phase. You’re no longer paying into your retirement account(s). Instead,
you start collecting the rewards of decades of savings.

Some retirement plans change depending on where you are. The United
States and Canada each have unique systems of workplace-sponsored
plans.‘

How Much Do You Need to Retire?

Your magic number, which is the amount you need to retire comfortably, is highly
personalized. But there are rules of thumb that can give you an idea of how much to save.

e People used to say that you need around $1 million to retire comfortably.

e Other professionals use the 80% rule, which states that you need 80% of your current
income to live comfortably after retiring. So if you made $100,000 per year, you would
need savings that produce $80,000 per year for roughly 20 years, or a total of $1.6
million.

e Others say most of us aren’t saving anywhere near enough to meet those benchmarks
and should adjust our lifestyles accordingly.

Estimating Expenses

Your post-retirement expenses largely determine that "magic number."

It's a good idea to create a retirement budget, calculating estimated costs for housing,
health insurance, food, clothing, and transportation.

And since you'll have more free time on your hands, you may also want to factor in the
cost of entertainment, hobbies, and travel.

It may be hard to come up with concrete figures, but a reasonable estimate will be helpful.

Steps to Retirement Planning

everyone during their retirement planning. The following are some of the most common:
Come up with a plan. This includes deciding when you want to start saving when you
want to retire, and how much you'd like to save for your ultimate goal.

Decide how much you'll set aside each month. Using automatic deductions takes away
the guesswork, keeps you on track, and takes away the temptation to stop or
forget depositing money on your own.

Choose the right accounts for you. Invest in a 401(k) or similar account if your employer
offers that option. If the company offers an employer match and you don't sign up,
you're giving away free money. Whether or not there's an employer match, you're
getting a good deal tax-wise.

Check on your investments from time to time and make adjustments. This is especially
important after a big event, like marriage or a baby.

Retirement Plans

Tax-advantaged retirement savings plans have become the keystone of long-term savings
for Americans. You should have access to one or more of these plans depending on how
you earn a living. Each has its own rules and regulations.

Employer-Sponspored Plans

Most large companies offer their employees 401(k) plans. Nonprofit employers have
similar 403(b) plans.

An up-front benefit of these qualified retirement plans is that your employer has the option
to match what you invest up to a certain amount. For example, if you contribute 3% of your
annual income to your plan account, your employer may match that amount, depositing
the sum into your retirement account along with your contribution.

You can contribute more than the amount that will earn the employer match. Some experts
recommend contributing upwards of 10%.

401(k) Limits

The maximum is revised yearly by the IRS Participants can contribute up to $23,000 in
2024 to a 401(k) or 403(b), some of which may be added to with an employer

match. People over age 50 can contribute an extra $7,500 per year as a catch-up
contribution in 2024.2

 

 

These accounts can earn a much higher rate of return than a savings account (although
the investments are not free of risk). The funds in the account, if it is a traditional account
rather than a Roth account, are not taxed until you withdraw them. Since your
contributions are taken off your gross income, you will get an immediate income tax break.
Those who are on the cusp of a higher tax bracket might consider contributing enough to
lower their tax liability. *

Traditional Individual Retirement Accounts (IRAs)

The traditional individual retirement account (IRA) is similar to a 401(k) plan but it can be
obtained at virtually any bank or brokerage. It is primarily for self-employed people and
others who have no access to a 401(k), but anyone with earned income can invest in an
IRA.

The money you save in an IRA is deducted from your income for the year, lowering your
taxable income and, therefore, your tax liability.

The tax benefit to this kind of account is upfront. So when it comes time to take
distributions from the account, you are subject to your standard tax rate at that time. Keep
in mind, though, that the money grows on a tax-deferred basis. There are no capital
gains or dividend taxes that are assessed on the balance of your account until you begin
making withdrawals. *

IRA Limits

The IRS sets limits on how much you can contribute to a traditional IRA each year. The
limit for 2024 is $7,000. People who are 50 and older can invest an additional $1,000 for a
total of $8,000 in 2024.2

Distributions must be taken at age 72 and can be taken as early as 59%. You will owe
taxes on the withdrawal at your regular income tax rate for that year. °

Roth Individual Retirement Account (IRA)

A Roth IRA is funded with post-tax dollars. This is a great variation on the IRA, with a little
more pain upfront for a lot of gain down the road.

The Roth IRA eliminates the immediate tax deduction of the traditional IRA. The money
you pay into it is taxed in that year.

However, you should owe no taxes when you start withdrawing money, either on the
amount you put in or the investment gains it accrued.

Starting a Roth IRA early can pay off big time in the long run, even if you don’t have a lot
of money to invest at first. Remember, the longer the money sits in a retirement account,
the more tax-free interest is earned.
Roth Limits

The 2024 contribution limit for either IRA (Roth or traditional) is $7,000 a year, or $8,000 if
you are over age 50. A Roth has other restrictions, related to income. For instance:

¢ Asingle filer can contribute the full amount only if they make $146,000 or less annually,
as of the 2024 tax year.

« After that, you can invest to a lesser degree, up to an annual income of $161,000 in
2024.

Note that the income limits are higher for married couples filing jointly.2

As with a 401(k), a Roth IRA has some penalties associated with taking money out before
you hit retirement age. But there are a few notable exceptions that may be useful in an
emergency. First, you can always withdraw the money you invested (but not the gains it
earned) without paying a penalty. ©

SIMPLE Individual Retirement Account (IRA)

The SIMPLE IRA is a retirement account available to employees of small businesses. It's
an alternative to the 401(k), which is expensive for an employer to manage. It works the
same way a 401(k) does, allowing employees to save money automatically through payroll
deductions with the option of an employer match.

This amount is capped at 3% of an employee's annual salary. The annual contribution limit
for a SIMPLE IRA is $16,000 in 2024. Catch-up contributions of $3,500 allow employees
50 or older to bump that limit up to $19,500 in 2024.2

Once you set up a retirement account, the question becomes where to invest the
money. You will be offered a choice, usually among mutual funds and exchange-
traded funds (ETFs). Many also offer target-date funds, which automatically alter
your selections over time, allocating more money towards conservative choices
as you approach retirement age.

Stages of Retirement Planning

Below are some guidelines for successful retirement planning at different stages of your
life.

Young Adulthood (Ages 21-35)

Those embarking on adult life may not have a lot of money free to invest, but they do have
time to let investments mature, which is a critical piece of retirement savings. This is the
principle of compounding.

Compound interest allows interest to earn interest, and the more time you have, the more
interest you will earn. If you can only put aside $50 a month, it will be worth three times
more if you invest it at age 25 than if you wait to start investing until age 45, thanks to the
joys of compounding.

You might be able to invest more money in the future, but you’ll never be able to make up
for that lost time.

Some federal agencies and uniformed services offer thrift savings plans.”

Early Midlife (Ages 36-50)

Early midlife tends to bring financial strains, including mortgages, student loans, insurance
premiums, and credit card debt.

Still, it’s critical to continue saving at this stage of retirement planning. The combination of
earning more money and the time you still have to invest and earn interest makes these
years some of the best for aggressive savings. 8

People at this stage of retirement planning should continue to take advantage of any
401(k) matching programs that their employers offer. They should also try to max out
contributions to a 401(k) or Roth IRA (you can have both at the same time). For those
ineligible for a Roth IRA, consider a traditional IRA. As with your 401(k), this is funded with
pretax dollars, and the assets within it grow tax-deferred.

Some employer-sponsored plans offer a Roth option to set aside after-tax retirement
contributions. You are limited to the same annual limit, but there are no income
limitations as with a Roth IRA.9

Finally, don’t neglect life insurance and disability insurance. You want to ensure that your
family can survive financially without pulling from retirement savings should something
happen to you.

 

Later Midlife (Ages 50-65)

As you approach retirement, your investment accounts should become more
conservative. Treasury bills (T-bills) are one of the most conservative investments,
although their returns are also low compared to other investments.

 

 
People in this age group have a few advantages. These often include higher wages as
well as more disposable income than younger savers. '°

It's never too late to set up and contribute to a 401(k) or an IRA. One benefit of this
retirement planning stage is catch-up contributions. From age 50 on, you can contribute
an additional $1,000 a year to your traditional or Roth IRA and an additional $7,500 a year
to your 401(k) in 2024.

Other Investments

Those who have maxed out their tax-incentivized retirement savings options can consider
other forms of investment to supplement your retirement savings. Certificates of

deposit (CDs), blue-chip stocks, or real estate investments (like a vacation home that you
rent out) can be reasonably safe ways to add to your nest egg.

You can also begin to get a sense of what your Social Security benefits will be and at what
age it makes sense to start taking them. Eligibility for early benefits starts at age 62, but
the retirement age for full benefits is 66.

This is the time to look into long-term care insurance, which will help cover the costs of a
nursing home or home care should you need it in your advanced years. If you don't
properly plan for health-related expenses, especially unexpected ones, they can decimate
your savings.

The Social Security Administration (SSA) offers an online calculator to estimate
your eventual monthly payment.

Other Aspects of Retirement Planning

Retirement planning includes a lot more than simply how much you will save and how
much you need. It takes into account your complete financial picture.

Your Home

For most Americans, the single biggest asset they own is their home. How does that fit
into your retirement plan?

A home was considered an asset in the past, but since the housing market crash, planners
see it as less of an asset than they once did. With the popularity of home equity

loans and home equity lines of credit (HELOCs), many homeowners are entering
retirement in mortgage debt instead of well above water.

 
Once you retire, there’s also the question of whether you should sell your home and
downsize. If you still live in the home where you raised a family, it might be bigger and
costlier than you need or want.

Your retirement plan should include an unbiased look at your home and what to do with it.

Estate Planning

Your estate plan addresses what happens to your assets after you die. It should include
a will that lays out your plans.

But even before that, you should set up a trust or use some other strategy to keep as
much of it as possible shielded from estate taxes.

As of 2024, the first $13.61 million of an estate is exempt from estate taxes (up from
$12.92 million for 2023), but many people are finding ways to leave their money to their
children in a way that doesn’t pay them in a lump sum. 12

There may also be changes coming down the pipeline in Congress regarding estate taxes,
as the estate tax amount is scheduled to drop to $5 million in 2026.13

Tax Efficiency

Once you reach retirement age and begin taking distributions, taxes become a bigger
problem. Most of your retirement accounts are taxed as ordinary income tax.

That’s one good argument for considering a Roth IRA or a Roth 401(k), as both allow you
to pay taxes upfront rather than upon withdrawal. 1415

If you believe you will have a higher taxable income later in life, it may make sense to doa
Roth conversion. An accountant or financial planner can help you work through such tax
considerations.

Medical Insurance

Medical expenses tend to increase with age. You will have government-
sponsored Medicare coverage at a modest cost to you, but many supplement its coverage
with a Medicare Advantage or Medigap policy.

Your choices are many and complex. It's a good idea to start checking out your options
well in advance of retiring.
How Do | Start a Retirement Plan?

Retirement planning isn't difficult. It's as easy as setting aside some money every month—
and every little bit counts.

You can start with a tax-advantaged savings plan, either a 401(k) through an employer or
an IRA through a bank or brokerage firm.

You may also want to consider talking to a professional, such as a financial planner or
investment broker who can steer you in the right direction.

The earlier you start, the better. That's because your investments grow over time by
earning interest. And you'll earn interest on that interest.

Why Is a Retirement Plan So Important?

A retirement plan helps you sock away enough money to maintain the same lifestyle you
currently have after you retire. While you may work part-time or pick up the odd gig here or
there, it probably won't be enough to sustain your current lifestyle. Social Security benefits
will only take you so far. That's why it's important to have a viable long-term plan for a
financially comfortable retirement.

What Are the Main Pieces of a Retirement Plan?

A retirement plan is about accumulating enough money to enable you to enjoy a
comfortable life after work. There are a couple of key issues to keep in mind:

e Consider how to minimize the taxes you owe on your retirement income. One way to do
this is to sock away money in a Roth account or convert your traditional account to a
Roth before you retire.

e Don't overlook estate planning. You're taking care of your loved ones as you take care
of yourself.

 

What Are the Options Beyond a 401(k)?

If you don't have access to a 401(k), you have a few options. You could open an individual
retirement account (IRA). However, the contribution limit for IRAs is much lower than for
401(k)s: $7,000 vs. $23,000, respectively. '® There's also the solo 401(k) for self-
employed workers. You might consider annuity, but be careful: they're typically illiquid and
come with high fees. You can also put money in a brokerage account, though this won't
benefit from the tax advantages of the accounts listed above.

The Bottom Line

Everyone dreams of the day they can finally say goodbye to the workforce. But doing so
costs money. That's where retirement planning comes into play.
It doesn't matter at what point you are in your life. Setting aside money now means you'll
have less to worry about later


--- End of Retirement.pdf ---
--- Start of estate planning.pdf ---
What is Estate Planning?

Indians are now becoming more interested in estate planning. Throughout history, property disputes and investment
disputes have played a major role in destroying family relationships. Let’s examine what is estate planning, without
further ado!

Estate planning’s meaning is simple, it is to make sure that your assets/investments go to the right people. To pass
your wealth on to your heirs, you must ensure that your wishes and family values are well-documented and
understood by them.

This is a loving gesture you make to your loved ones after you pass away. It could be anything from properties to
cars, money to other assets, or anything you own. In the event, that you fail to make estate planning decisions while
alive and able, then the state law and probate court will make those decisions for you. State Law & Probate Court, on
the other hand, has the disadvantage of being unable to make decisions that are in harmony with what you or your
family would prefer.

Advantages of Estate Planning in India

Estate planning offers numerous benefits to individuals and families in India, ensuring the smooth transfer of assets
and providing financial security for future generations. Some key advantages include:

Avoiding Legal Disputes: Proper estate planning minimizes the chances of disputes among heirs by clearly outlining
the distribution of assets, thereby reducing legal complications and family conflicts.

Tax Efficiency: Estate planning helps in structuring your assets in a way that minimizes tax liabilities, ensuring that
more of your wealth is passed on to your beneficiaries rather than being lost to taxes.

Asset Protection: By creating trusts and other legal structures, estate planning can protect your assets from
creditors and legal claims, ensuring that your wealth remains intact for your heirs.

Ensuring Wishes are Honoured: Estate planning allows you to specify how your assets should be managed and
distributed according to your wishes, ensuring that your legacy is preserved as intended.

Providing for Dependents: Through wills, trusts, and other estate planning tools, you can ensure that your
dependents, such as minor children or elderly parents, are financially secure and cared for after your passing.

Efficient Probate Process: Comprehensive estate planning can streamline the probate process, reducing the time
and costs associated with settling your estate, and ensuring a quicker distribution of assets to your beneficiaries.

Peace of Mind: Knowing that your affairs are in order and your loved ones are provided for brings peace of mind,
allowing you to focus on enjoying life without worrying about the future uncertainties.

Process of Estate Planning in India

The estate planning process involves making arrangements for the management and distribution of one’s assets and
properties during and after their lifetime. Here are the seven steps typically involved in the estate planning process:

1. Define Your Goals and Objectives:

To begin the process of estate planning, it is important to determine your goals. Consider what you want to achieve
with your estate plan, such as providing for your family, minimizing taxes, supporting charitable causes, or ensuring
the smooth transfer of assets to beneficiaries.
2. Gather Information and Inventory Assets:

Create a comprehensive list of all your assets, including real estate, investments, bank accounts, retirement funds,
life insurance policies, business interests, valuable possessions, and any debts you owe. This inventory will help you
determine the scope of your estate and what needs to be addressed in your plan.

3. Choose Appropriate Advisor:

Select trustworthy individuals to carry out your wishes as outlined in your estate plan. Key roles may include
executors (responsible for administering your estate), trustees (managing trusts if applicable), guardians for minor
children (if applicable), and agents for powers of attorney (handling financial or healthcare decisions if you become
incapacitated) and a reliable investment advisor to help guide your financial strategies.

4. Create Essential Estate Planning Documents:
Based on your goals and objectives, work with an estate planning attorney to draft the necessary legal documents.
5. Plan for Taxation:

Estate taxes can significantly impact the value of your estate and the inheritance received by your beneficiaries.
Explore tax mitigation strategies to minimize estate and gift taxes, such as gifting strategies, charitable giving, and
trust planning.

6. Review and Update Regularly:

Your life circumstances and laws may change over time, so it’s essential to review and update your estate plan
periodically. Major life events like marriage, divorce, birth of children, or changes in financial status should trigger a
review of your plan.

7. Communicate Your Plan:

Once your estate plan is complete, ensure your family members, beneficiaries, and key fiduciaries are aware of its
existence and your intentions. Transparent communication can prevent misunderstandings and ensure a smooth
implementation of your wishes.

Also Read: 3 Simple things to do with your money to Build Wealth

LET’S
CONNECT

What documents are needed for estate planning?
As part of the estate planning process, an individual should consider the following four essential documents before
making any decisions about their future:

° The Will

e Letter of Guardianship

e Springing Durable Power of Attorney for Incapacitation

Components of Estate Planning

A comprehensive estate plan includes the following components:

WILL: It is important to define who you would like to inherit your assets from or who you would like to be the guardian
of your children or who you would like to become the executor to oversee your entire estate planning process after
their death.

POWER OF ATTORNEY: An individual who makes financial decisions on your behalf when you become incapacitated.
Your bills are paid, investments are managed, and legal & business decisions are made by them as well.

DIRECTIVES FOR HEALTH CARE: There is only one difference between a healthcare directive and a power of attorney
in that here medical decisions are to be made by a healthcare directive, rather than by a power of attorney.

TRUSTS: It is also important to note that they do not only control when and how assets are distributed but also
reduce or eliminate estate taxes.

DESIGNATIONS OF BENEFICIARIES: It is possible to find these in retirement accounts and insurance policies. If you
are not present, they will decide who receives your benefits in your absence. You need to review your designations at
least once a year.

Importance of estate planning in India

The importance of estate planning in preventing disputes and complications among your family members has been
discussed above. In addition to these benefits, there are others as well. With a plan in place, you can manage the
destiny of your hard-earned wealth so that your heirs enjoy both the benefits and peace of mind you want for them.

e Don't let the wealth transfer process go against your wishes by not planning how and when your assets will be
distributed.

¢ Beneficiaries should be re-designated as needed.
Tax minimization is important.

¢ Assist children and family members with special needs, young and old.
e Incase of your death or illness, make sure your family is financially secure.

e Ifyou are not able to execute your wishes, they will be carried out on your behalf.
Succession and disposition of the estate in a peaceful manner


--- End of estate planning.pdf ---
--- Start of microeconomics.pdf ---
Microeconomics is a branch of economics that studies the behavior of individuals and firms in
making decisions regarding the allocation of scarce resources and the interactions among these
individuals and firms.!"[2!I5] Microeconomics focuses on the study of individual markets, sectors, or
industries as opposed to the economy as a whole, which is studied in macroeconomics.

One goal of microeconomics is to analyze the market mechanisms that establish relative
prices among goods and services and allocate limited resources among alternative uses
Microeconomics shows conditions under which free markets lead to desirable allocations. It also
analyzes market failure, where markets fail to produce efficient results. 4]

[citation needed]

While microeconomics focuses on firms and individuals, macroeconomics focuses on the total of
economic activity, dealing with the issues of growth, inflation, and unemployment—and with national
policies relating to these issues.|4] Microeconomics also deals with the effects of economic policies
(such as changing taxation levels) on microeconomic behavior and thus on the aforementioned
aspects of the economy.!*! Particularly in the wake of the Lucas critique, much of modern
macroeconomic theories has been built upon microfoundations—i.e., based upon basic assumptions
about micro-level behavior.

Assumptions and definitions [cit]

Microeconomic study historically has been performed according to general equilibrium theory,
developed by Léon Walras in Elements of Pure Economics (1874) and partial equilibrium theory,
introduced by Alfred Marshall in Principles of Economics (1890).!°!

Microeconomic theory typically begins with the study of a single rational and utility
maximizing individual. To economists, rationality means an individual possesses
stable preferences that are both complete and transitive.

The technical assumption that preference relations are continuous is needed to ensure the existence
of a utility function. Although microeconomic theory can continue without this assumption, it would
make comparative statics impossible since there is no guarantee that the resulting utility function
would be differentiable.

Microeconomic theory progresses by defining a competitive budget set which is a subset of

the consumption set. It is at this point that economists make the technical assumption that preferences
are locally non-satiated. Without the assumption of LNS (local non-satiation) there is no 100%
guarantee but there would be a rational rise [*“aton needed] jn individual utility. With the necessary tools
and assumptions in place the utility maximization problem (UMP) is developed.

The utility maximization problem is the heart of consumer theory. The utility maximization problem
attempts to explain the action axiom by imposing rationality axioms on consumer preferences and
then mathematically modeling and analyzing the consequences. !*/‘@tion needed] The utility maximization
problem serves not only as the mathematical foundation of consumer theory but as

a metaphysical explanation of it as well. That is, the utility maximization problem is used by
economists to not only explain what or how individuals make choices but why individuals make
choices as well.

The utility maximization problem is a constrained optimization problem in which an individual seeks to
maximize utility subject to a budget constraint. Economists use the extreme value theorem to
guarantee that a solution to the utility maximization problem exists. That is, since the budget
constraint is both bounded and closed, a solution to the utility maximization problem exists.
Economists call the solution to the utility maximization problem a Walrasian demand function or

correspondence, |<iation needed]

The utility maximization problem has so far been developed by taking consumer tastes (i.e. consumer
utility) as primitive. However, an alternative way to develop microeconomic theory is by taking
consumer choice as primitive. This model of microeconomic theory is referred to as revealed

preference theory.

The theory of supply and demand usually assumes that markets
are perfectly competitive. This implies that there are many buyers
and sellers in the market and none of them have the capacity to
significantly influence prices of goods and services. In many real-
life transactions, the assumption fails because some individual
buyers or sellers have the ability to influence prices. Quite often, a
sophisticated analysis is required to understand the demand-
supply equation of a good model. However, the theory works well
in situations meeting these assumptions.

Mainstream economics does not assume a priori that markets are
preferable to other forms of social organization. In fact, much
analysis is devoted to cases where market failures lead

to resource allocation that is suboptimal and creates deadweight
loss. Aclassic example of suboptimal resource allocation is that of
a public good. In such cases, economists may attempt to find
policies that avoid waste, either directly by government control,
indirectly by regulation that induces market participants to act in a
manner consistent with optimal welfare, or by creating "missing
markets" to enable efficient trading where none had previously
existed.

This is studied in the field of collective action and public choice
theory. "Optimal welfare" usually takes on a Paretian norm, which
is a mathematical application of the Kaldor—Hicks method. This
can diverge from the Utilitarian goal of maximizing utility because it
does not consider the distribution of goods between people.
Market failure in positive economics (microeconomics) is limited in
implications without mixing the belief of the economist and their
theory.

Price

  

Qi Q Quantity

The supply and demand model
describes how prices vary as a
result of a balance between
product availability at each price
(supply) and the desires of those
with purchasing power at each
price (demand). The graph depicts
a right-shift in demand from D, to
Dz along with the consequent
increase in price and quantity
required to reach a new market-
clearing equilibrium point on the
supply curve (S).

The demand for various commodities by individuals is generally thought of as the outcome of a utility-
maximizing process, with each individual trying to maximize their own utility under a budget

constraint and a given consumption set.

Allocation of scarce resources [edit]

Individuals and firms need to allocate limited resources to ensure all agents in the economy are well
off. Firms decide which goods and services to produce considering low costs involving labor, materials
and capital as well as potential profit margins. Consumers choose the good and services they want
that will maximize their happiness taking into account their limited wealth.!7]

The government can make these allocation decisions or they can be independently made by the
consumers and firms. For example, in the former Soviet Union, the government played a part in
informing car manufacturers which cars to produce and which consumers will gain access to a car,!7]
History {ecit)

Main article: History of microeconomics

Economists commonly consider themselves microeconomists or macroeconomists. The difference
between microeconomics and macroeconomics likely was introduced in 1933 by the Norwegian
economist Ragnar Frisch, the co-recipient of the first Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences in
1969, [8Il°] However, Frisch did not actually use the word "microeconomics", instead drawing
distinctions between "micro-dynamic" and "macro-dynamic" analysis in a way similar to how the words
"microeconomics" and "macroeconomics" are used today, 81l19] The first known use of the term
"microeconomics" in a published article was from Pieter de Wolff in 1941, who broadened the term

"micro-dynamics" into "microeconomics".!9l"]

Microeconomic theory [eit]

Consumer demand theory [edit]
Main article: Consumer choice

Consumer demand theory relates preferences for the consumption of both goods and services to the
consumption expenditures; ultimately, this relationship between preferences and consumption
expenditures is used to relate preferences to consumer demand curves. The link between personal
preferences, consumption and the demand curve is one of the most closely studied relations in
economics. It is a way of analyzing how consumers may achieve equilibrium between preferences and
expenditures by maximizing utility subject to consumer budget constraints.

Production theory [edit]
Main article: Production theory

Production theory is the study of production, or the economic process of converting inputs into
outputs.!'2] Production uses resources to create a good or service that is suitable for use, gift-giving in
a gift economy, or exchange in a market economy. This can include manufacturing, storing, shipping,
and packaging. Some economists define production broadly as all economic activity other

than consumption. They see every commercial activity other than the final purchase as some form of
production.

Cost-of-production theory of value [eit]

Main article: Cost-of-production theory of value

The cost-of-production theory of value states that the price of an object or condition is determined by
the sum of the cost of the resources that went into making it. The cost can comprise any of the factors
of production (including labor, capital, or land) and taxation. Technology can be viewed either as a
form of fixed capital (e.g. an industrial plant) or circulating capital (e.g. intermediate goods).

In the mathematical model for the cost of production, the short-run total cost is equal to fixed cost plus
total variable cost. The fixed cost refers to the cost that is incurred regardless of how much the firm
produces. The variable cost is a function of the quantity of an object being produced. The cost function
can be used to characterize production through the duality theory in economics, developed mainly

by Ronald Shephard (1953, 1970) and other scholars (Sickles & Zelenyuk, 2019, ch. 2).
Fixed and variable costs [edit]

e Fixed cost (FC) — This cost does not change with output. It includes business expenses such as
rent, salaries and utility bills.

e Variable cost (VC) — This cost changes as output changes. This includes raw materials, delivery
costs and production supplies.

Over a short time period (few months), most costs are fixed costs as the firm will have to pay for
salaries, contracted shipment and materials used to produce various goods. Over a longer time period
(2-3 years), costs can become variable. Firms can decide to reduce output, purchase fewer materials
and even sell some machinery. Over 10 years, most costs become variable as workers can be laid off
or new machinery can be bought to replace the old machinery [13]

Sunk Costs — This is a fixed cost that has already been incurred and cannot be recovered. An
example of this can be in R&D development like in the pharmaceutical industry. Hundreds of millions
of dollars are spent to achieve new drug breakthroughs but this is challenging as its increasingly
harder to find new breakthroughs and meet tighter regulation standards. Thus many projects are
written off leading to losses of millions of dollars [14]

Opportunity cost [exit]
Main article: Opportunity cost

Opportunity cost is closely related to the idea of time constraints. One can do only one thing at a time,
which means that, inevitably, one is always giving up other things. The opportunity cost of any activity
is the value of the next-best alternative thing one may have done instead. Opportunity cost depends
only on the value of the next-best alternative. It does not matter whether one has five alternatives or
5,000.

Opportunity costs can tell when not to do something as well as when to do something. For example,
one may like waffles, but like chocolate even more. If someone offers only waffles, one would take it.
But if offered waffles or chocolate, one would take the chocolate. The opportunity cost of eating
waffles is sacrificing the chance to eat chocolate. Because the cost of not eating the chocolate is
higher than the benefits of eating the waffles, it makes no sense to choose waffles. Of course, if one
chooses chocolate, they are still faced with the opportunity cost of giving up having waffles. But one is
willing to do that because the waffle's opportunity cost is lower than the benefits of the chocolate.
Opportunity costs are unavoidable constraints on behavior because one has to decide what's best and
give up the next-best alternative.

Price theory [eit]

Microeconomics is also known as price theory to highlight the significance of prices in relation to buyer
and sellers as these agents determine prices due to their individual actions.!’! Price theory is a field

of economics that uses the supply and demand framework to explain and predict human behavior. It is
associated with the Chicago School of Economics. Price theory studies competitive

equilibrium in markets to yield testable hypotheses that can be rejected.

Price theory is not the same as microeconomics. Strategic behavior, such as the interactions among
sellers in a market where they are few, is a significant part of microeconomics but is not emphasized in
price theory. Price theorists focus on competition believing it to be a reasonable description of most
markets that leaves room to study additional aspects of tastes and technology. As a result, price
theory tends to use less game theory than microeconomics does.
Price theory focuses on how agents respond to prices, but its framework can be applied to a wide
variety of socioeconomic issues that might not seem to involve prices at first glance. Price theorists
have influenced several other fields including developing public choice theory and law and economics.
Price theory has been applied to issues previously thought of as outside the purview of economics
such as criminal justice, marriage, and addiction.

Microeconomic models [eait)

Supply and demand [edi]
Main article: Supply and demand

Supply and demand is an economic model of price determination in a perfectly competitive market. It
concludes that in a perfectly competitive market with no externalities, per unit taxes, or price controls,
the unit price for a particular good is the price at which the quantity demanded by consumers equals
the quantity supplied by producers. This price results in a stable economic equilibrium.

Prices and quantities have been described as the most directly
observable attributes of goods produced and exchanged in

a market economy.!"5! The theory of supply and demand is an
organizing principle for explaining how prices coordinate the
amounts produced and consumed. In microeconomics, it applies to
price and output determination for a market with perfect
competition, which includes the condition of no buyers or sellers
large enough to have price-setting power.

Price

For a given market of a commodity, demand is the relation of the
quantity that all buyers would be prepared to purchase at each unit
price of the good. Demand is often represented by a table or a
graph showing price and quantity demanded (as in the

  

Qi Q Quantity

figure). Demand theory describes individual consumers The supply and demand model
as rationally choosing the most preferred quantity of each good, describes how prices vary as a
given income, prices, tastes, etc. A term for this is "constrained result of a balance between

utility maximization" (with income and wealth as the constraints on
demand). Here, utility refers to the hypothesized relation of each
individual consumer for ranking different commodity bundles as
more or less preferred.

product availability and demand.
The graph depicts an increase
(that is, right-shift) in demand from
D, to Dz along with the

The law of demand states that, in general, price and quantity consequent increase in price and
demanded in a given market are inversely related. That is, the quantity required to reach a new
higher the price of a product, the less of it people would be equilibrium point on the supply
prepared to buy (other things unchanged). As the price of a curve (S).

commodity falls, consumers move toward it from relatively more

expensive goods (the substitution effect). In addition, purchasing

power from the price decline increases ability to buy (the income effect). Other factors can change
demand; for example an increase in income will shift the demand curve for a normal good outward
relative to the origin, as in the figure. All determinants are predominantly taken as constant factors of
demand and supply.

Supply is the relation between the price of a good and the quantity available for sale at that price. It
may be represented as a table or graph relating price and quantity supplied. Producers, for example
business firms, are hypothesized to be profit maximizers, meaning that they attempt to produce and
supply the amount of goods that will bring them the highest profit. Supply is typically represented as a
function relating price and quantity, if other factors are unchanged.

That is, the higher the price at which the good can be sold, the more of it producers will supply, as in
the figure. The higher price makes it profitable to increase production. Just as on the demand side, the
position of the supply can shift, say from a change in the price of a productive input or a technical
improvement. The "Law of Supply" states that, in general, a rise in price leads to an expansion in
supply and a fall in price leads to a contraction in supply. Here as well, the determinants of supply,
such as price of substitutes, cost of production, technology applied and various factors of inputs of
production are all taken to be constant for a specific time period of evaluation of supply.

Market equilibrium occurs where quantity supplied equals quantity demanded, the intersection of the
supply and demand curves in the figure above. At a price below equilibrium, there is a shortage of
quantity supplied compared to quantity demanded. This is posited to bid the price up. At a price above
equilibrium, there is a surplus of quantity supplied compared to quantity demanded. This pushes the
price down. The model of supply and demand predicts that for given supply and demand curves, price
and quantity will stabilize at the price that makes quantity supplied equal to quantity demanded.
Similarly, demand-and-supply theory predicts a new price-quantity combination from a shift in demand
(as to the figure), or in supply.

For a given quantity of a consumer good, the point on the demand curve indicates the value,

or marginal utility, to consumers for that unit. It measures what the consumer would be prepared to
pay for that unit.!"6] The corresponding point on the supply curve measures marginal cost, the
increase in total cost to the supplier for the corresponding unit of the good. The price in equilibrium is
determined by supply and demand. In a perfectly competitive market, supply and demand equate
marginal cost and marginal utility at equilibrium.!"7]

On the supply side of the market, some factors of production are described as (relatively) variable in
the short run, which affects the cost of changing output levels. Their usage rates can be changed
easily, such as electrical power, raw-material inputs, and over-time and temp work. Other inputs are
relatively fixed, such as plant and equipment and key personnel. In the long run, all inputs may be
adjusted by management. These distinctions translate to differences in the elasticity (responsiveness)
of the supply curve in the short and long runs and corresponding differences in the price-quantity
change from a shift on the supply or demand side of the market.

Marginalist theory, such as above, describes the consumers as attempting to reach most-preferred
positions, subject to income and wealth constraints while producers attempt to maximize profits
subject to their own constraints, including demand for goods produced, technology, and the price of
inputs. For the consumer, that point comes where marginal utility of a good, net of price, reaches zero,
leaving no net gain from further consumption increases. Analogously, the producer compares marginal
revenue (identical to price for the perfect competitor) against the marginal cost of a good,

with marginal profit the difference. At the point where marginal profit reaches zero, further increases in
production of the good stop. For movement to market equilibrium and for changes in equilibrium, price
and quantity also change "at the margin": more-or-less of something, rather than necessarily all-or-
nothing.

Other applications of demand and supply include the distribution of income among the factors of
production, including labor and capital, through factor markets. In a competitive labor market for
example the quantity of labor employed and the price of labor (the wage rate) depends on the demand
for labor (from employers for production) and supply of labor (from potential workers). Labor
economics examines the interaction of workers and employers through such markets to explain
patterns and changes of wages and other labor income, labor mobility, and (un)employment,

productivity through human capital, and related public-policy issues.|'8]
Demand-and-supply analysis is used to explain the behavior of perfectly competitive markets, but as a
standard of comparison it can be extended to any type of market. It can also be generalized to explain
variables across the economy, for example, total output (estimated as real GDP) and the general price
level, as studied in macroeconomics. !"9 Tracing the qualitative and quantitative effects of variables
that change supply and demand, whether in the short or long run, is a standard exercise in applied
economics. Economic theory may also specify conditions such that supply and demand through the
market is an efficient mechanism for allocating resources. (201

Market structure [edit
Main article: Market structure

This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve
this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced
material may be challenged and removed. (October

2018) (Learn how and when to remove this message)

Market structure refers to features of a market, including the number of firms in the market, the
distribution of market shares between them, product uniformity across firms, how easy it is for firms to
enter and exit the market, and forms of competition in the market.!21ll22] 4 market structure can have
several types of interacting market systems. Different forms of markets are a feature

of capitalism and market socialism, with advocates of state socialism often criticizing markets and
aiming to substitute or replace markets with varying degrees of government-directed economic
planning.

Competition acts as a regulatory mechanism for market systems, with government providing
regulations where the market cannot be expected to regulate itself. Regulations help to

mitigate negative externalities of goods and services when the private equilibrium of the market does
not match the social equilibrium. One example of this is with regards to building codes, which if absent
in a purely competition regulated market system, might result in several horrific injuries or deaths to be
required before companies would begin improving structural safety, as consumers may at first not be
as concerned or aware of safety issues to begin putting pressure on companies to provide them, and
companies would be motivated not to provide proper safety features due to how it would cut into their
profits.

The concept of "market type" is different from the concept of "market structure". Nevertheless, there
are a variety of types of markets.

The different market structures produce cost curves'25] based on the type of structure present. The
different curves are developed based on the costs of production, specifically the graph contains
marginal cost, average total cost, average variable cost, average fixed cost, and marginal revenue,
which is sometimes equal to the demand, average revenue, and price in a price-taking firm.

Perfect competition [eccit]
Main article: Perfect competition

Perfect competition is a situation in which numerous small firms producing identical products compete
against each other in a given industry. Perfect competition leads to firms producing the socially optimal
output level at the minimum possible cost per unit. Firms in perfect competition are "price takers" (they
do not have enough market power to profitably increase the price of their goods or services). A good
example would be that of digital marketplaces, such as eBay, on which many different sellers sell
similar products to many different buyers. Consumers in a perfect competitive market have perfect
knowledge about the products that are being sold in this market.

Imperfect competition [edit]
Main article: Imperfect competition

Imperfect competition is a type of market structure showing some but not all features of competitive
markets. In perfect competition, market power is not achievable due to a high level of producers
causing high levels of competition. Therefore, prices are brought down to a marginal cost level. Ina
monopoly, market power is achieved by one firm leading to prices being higher than the marginal cost
level. '24] Between these two types of markets are firms that are neither perfectly competitive or
monopolistic. Firms such as Pepsi and Coke and Sony, Nintendo and Microsoft dominate the cola and
video game industry respectively. These firms are in imperfect competition |2°!

Monopolistic competition [eait]
Main article: Monopolistic competition

Monopolistic competition is a situation in which many firms with slightly different products compete.
Production costs are above what may be achieved by perfectly competitive firms, but society benefits
from the product differentiation. Examples of industries with market structures similar to monopolistic
competition include restaurants, cereal, clothing, shoes, and service industries in large cities.

Monopoly [edit]
Main article: Monopoly

A monopoly is a market structure in which a market or industry is dominated by a single supplier of a
particular good or service. Because monopolies have no competition, they tend to sell goods and
services at a higher price and produce below the socially optimal output level. However, not all
monopolies are a bad thing, especially in industries where multiple firms would result in more costs
than benefits (i.e. natural monopolies).!2°ll27]
e Natural monopoly: A monopoly in an industry where one producer can produce output at a lower
cost than many small producers.

Oligopoly [edit]
Main article: Oligopoly

An oligopoly is a market structure in which a market or industry is dominated by a small number of
firms (oligopolists). Oligopolies can create the incentive for firms to engage in collusion and
form cartels that reduce competition leading to higher prices for consumers and less overall market
output, |28] Alternatively, oligopolies can be fiercely competitive and engage in flamboyant advertising
campaigns.|2°!
e Duopoly: A special case of an oligopoly, with only two firms. Game theory can elucidate behavior in
duopolies and oligopolies.!°°!

Monopsony [edit]
Main article: Monopsony
A monopsony is a market where there is only one buyer and many sellers.
Bilateral monopoly [eit]
Main article: Bilateral monopoly

A bilateral monopoly is a market consisting of both a monopoly (a single seller) and a monopsony (a
single buyer).

Oligopsony [edit]
Main article: Oligopsony
An oligopsony is a market where there are a few buyers and many sellers.

Game theory [edit

Main article: Game theory

Game theory is a major method used in mathematical economics and business

for modeling competing behaviors of interacting agents. The term "game" here implies the study of
any strategic interaction between people. Applications include a wide array of economic phenomena
and approaches, such as auctions, bargaining, mergers & acquisitions pricing, fair division, duopolies,
oligopolies, social network formation, agent-based computational economics, general

equilibrium, mechanism design, and voting systems, and across such broad areas as experimental
economics, behavioral economics, information economics, industrial organization, and political
economy.

Information economics {eit

Main article: Information economics

Information economics is a branch of microeconomic theory that studies how information and
information systems affect an economy and economic decisions. Information has special
characteristics. It is easy to create but hard to trust. It is easy to spread but hard to control. It
influences many decisions. These special characteristics (as compared with other types of goods)
complicate many standard economic theories.!°"! The economics of information has recently become
of great interest to many - possibly due to the rise of information-based companies inside the
technology industry,!9I From a game theory approach, the usual constraints that agents have complete
information can be loosened to further examine the consequences of having incomplete information.
This gives rise to many results which are applicable to real life situations. For example, if one does
loosen this assumption, then it is possible to scrutinize the actions of agents in situations of
uncertainty. It is also possible to more fully understand the impacts — both positive and negative — of
agents seeking out or acquiring information.|°!

Applied {ecit)

Applied microeconomics includes a range of specialized areas of study, many of which draw on
methods from other fields.

e Economic history examines the evolution of the economy and economic institutions, using
methods and techniques from the fields of economics, history, geography, sociology, psychology,
and political science.
Education economics examines the organization of education
provision and its implication for efficiency and equity, including
the effects of education on productivity.

Financial economics examines topics such as the structure of
optimal portfolios, the rate of return to capital, econometric
analysis of security returns, and corporate financial behavior.
Health economics examines the organization of health care
systems, including the role of the health care workforce and
health insurance programs.

Industrial organization examines topics such as the entry and
exit of firms, innovation, and the role of trademarks.

Law and economics applies microeconomic principles to the
selection and enforcement of competing legal regimes and
their relative efficiencies.

Political economy examines the role of political institutions in
determining policy outcomes.

Public economics examines the design of government tax and
expenditure policies and economic effects of these policies
(e.g., social insurance programs).

 

United States Capitol Building:
meeting place of the United
States Congress, where many tax
laws are passed, which directly
impact economic welfare. This is
studied in the subject of public
economics.

Urban economics, which examines the challenges faced by cities, such as sprawl, air and water
pollution, traffic congestion, and poverty, draws on the fields of urban geography and sociology.
Labor economics examines primarily labor markets, but comprises a large range of public policy

issues such as immigration, minimum wages, or inequality


--- End of microeconomics.pdf ---
--- Start of macroeconimics.pdf ---
Macroeconomics is a branch of economics that deals with the performance, structure, behavior, and
decision-making of an economy as a whole.!"! This includes national, regional, and global
economies.!2lI$] Macroeconomists study topics such as output/GDP (gross domestic product)

and national income, unemployment (including unemployment rates), price

indices and inflation, consumption, saving, investment, energy, international trade, and international
finance.

Macroeconomics and microeconomics are the two most general fields in economics.'4! The focus of
macroeconomics is often on a country (or larger entities like the whole world) and how its markets
interact to produce large-scale phenomena that economists refer to as aggregate variables. In
microeconomics the focus of analysis is often a single market, such as whether changes in supply or
demand are to blame for price increases in the oil and automotive sectors. From introductory classes
in "principles of economics" through doctoral studies, the macro/micro divide is institutionalized in the
field of economics. Most economists identify as either macro- or micro-economists.

Macroeconomics is traditionally divided into topics along different time frames: the analysis of short-
term fluctuations over the business cycle, the determination of structural levels of variables like
inflation and unemployment in the medium (i.e. unaffected by short-term deviations) term, and the
study of long-term economic growth. It also studies the consequences of policies targeted at mitigating
fluctuations like fiscal or monetary policy, using taxation and government expenditure or interest rates,
respectively, and of policies that can affect living standards in the long term, e.g. by affecting growth
rates.

Macroeconomics as a separate field of research and study is generally recognized to start in 1936,
when John Maynard Keynes published his The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money,
but its intellectual predecessors are much older. Since World War II, various macroeconomic schools
of thought like Keynesians, monetarists, new classical and new Keynesian economists have made
contributions to the development of the macroeconomic research mainstream.

Basic macroeconomic concepts [cai]

Macroeconomics encompasses a variety of concepts and variables, but above all the three central
macroeconomic variables are output, unemployment, and inflation.5!:39 Besides, the time horizon
varies for different types of macroeconomic topics, and this distinction is crucial for many research and
policy debates. 5:54 ~ further important dimension is that of an economy's openness, economic theory
distinguishing sharply between closed economies and open economies. |5!:373

Time frame [edit] a te

It is usual to distinguish between three time horizons in
macroeconomics, each having its own focus on e.g. the
determination of output:!5!"54

e the short run (e.g. a few years): Focus is on business
cycle fluctuations and changes in aggregate demand which
often drive them. Stabilization policies like monetary
policy or fiscal policy are relevant in this time frame

e the medium run (e.g. a decade): Over the medium run, the
economy tends to an output level determined by supply factors
like the capital stock, the technology level and the labor force,
and unemployment tends to revert to its structural (or "natural")
level. These factors move slowly, so that it is a reasonable

 

Circulation in macroeconomics
approximation to take them as given in a medium-term time scale, though labour market
policies and competition policy are instruments that may influence the economy's structures and
hence also the medium-run equilibrium

e the long run (e.g. a couple of decades or more): On this time scale, emphasis is on the
determinants of long-run economic growth like accumulation of human and physical capital,
technological innovations and demographic changes. Potential policies to influence these
developments are education reforms, incentives to change saving rates or to
increase R&D activities.

Output and income [edit]

National output is the total amount of everything a country produces in a given period of time.
Everything that is produced and sold generates an equal amount of income. The total net output of the
economy is usually measured as gross domestic product (GDP). Adding net factor incomes from
abroad to GDP produces gross national income (GNI), which measures total income of all residents in
the economy. In most countries, the difference between GDP and GNI are modest so that GDP can
approximately be treated as total income of all the inhabitants as well, but in some countries, e.g.
countries with very large net foreign assets (or debt), the difference may be considerable. !°!385

Economists interested in long-run increases in output study economic growth. Advances in technology,
accumulation of machinery and other capital, and better education and human capital, are all factors
that lead to increased economic output over time. However, output does not always increase
consistently over time. Business cycles can cause short-term drops in output called recessions.
Economists look for macroeconomic policies that prevent economies from slipping into

either recessions or overheating and that lead to higher productivity levels and standards of living.

Unemployment [edit]
Main article: Unemployment

The amount of unemployment in an economy is measured by the
unemployment rate, i.e. the percentage of persons in the labor
force who do not have a job, but who are actively looking for one.
People who are retired, pursuing education, or discouraged from
seeking work by a lack of job prospects are not part of the labor
force and consequently not counted as unemployed, either, |5!:156

 

Unemployment has a short-run cyclical component which depends
on the business cycle, and a more permanent structural
component, which can be loosely thought of as the average
unemployment rate in an economy over extended periods, !*! and
which is often termed the naturall®! or structural!7II5!:167 rate of

A chart using US data showing
the relationship between

economic growth and unemployment.

unemployment expressed

by Okun's law. The relationship Cyclical unemployment occurs when growth stagnates. Okun's
demonstrates cyclical law represents the empirical relationship between unemployment
unemployment. High short-run and short-run GDP growth.!®) The original version of Okun's law
GDP growth leads to a lower states that a 3% increase in output would lead to a 1% decrease in
unemployment rate. unemployment.'°)

The structural or natural rate of unemployment is the level of
unemployment that will occur in a medium-run equilibrium, i.e. a situation with a cyclical
unemployment rate of zero. There may be several reasons why there is some positive unemployment
level even in a cyclically neutral situation, which all have their foundation in some kind of market
failure:!6]

e Search unemployment (also called frictional unemployment) occurs when workers and firms are
heterogeneous and there is imperfect information, generally causing a time-consuming search and
matching process when filling a job vacancy in a firm, during which the prospective worker will
often be unemployed.!©!'°] Sectoral shifts and other reasons for a changed demand from firms for
workers with particular skills and characteristics, which occur continually in a changing economy,
may also cause more search unemployment because of increased mismatch. !""1I"2II"3]

e Efficiency wage models are labor market models in which firms choose not to lower wages to the
level where supply equals demand because the lower wages would lower employees' efficiency
levels!"1]

e Trade unions, which are important actors in the labor market in some countries, may
exercise market power in order to keep wages over the market-clearing level for the benefice of
their members even at the cost of some unemployment

e Legal minimum wages may prevent the wage from falling to a market-clearing level, causing
unemployment among low-skilled (and low-paid) workers. !"“ll'4] in the case of employers having
some monopsony power, however, employment effects may have the opposite sign.!"*!

Inflation and deflation [cait]

A general price increase across the entire economy is

called inflation. When prices decrease, there is deflation. . |

Economists measure these changes in prices with price indexes. (\

Inflation will increase when an economy becomes overheated and h |
“Ny \\ { ih

M2 Geowth and inflation {10-year averagan, USA]

grows too quickly. Similarly, a declining economy can lead to
decreasing inflation and even in some cases deflation.

Central bankers conducting monetary policy usually have as a : é \
main priority to avoid too high inflation, typically by adjusting yp eg ee
interest rates. High inflation as well as deflation can lead to

increased uncertainty and other negative consequences, in Changes in the ten-year moving

particular when the inflation (or deflation) is unexpected. averages of price level and growth

Consequently, most central banks aim for a positive, but stable and —_in money supply (using the

not very high inflation level. [5] measure of M2, the supply of hard
currency and money held in most

Changes in the inflation level may be the result of several factors. types of bank accounts) in the US

Too much aggregate demand in the economy will cause from 1880 to 2016. Over the long

an overheating, raising inflation rates via the Phillips

curve because of a tight labor market leading to large wage
increases which will be transmitted to increases in the price of the
products of employers. Too little aggregate demand will have the
opposite effect of creating more unemployment and lower wages,
thereby decreasing inflation. Aggregate supply shocks will also affect inflation, e.g. the oil crises of the
1970s and the 2021—2023 global energy crisis. Changes in inflation may also impact the formation

of inflation expectations, creating a self-fulfilling inflationary or deflationary spiral.[5]

run, the two series show a clear
positive correlation.

The monetarist quantity theory of money holds that changes in the price level are directly caused by
changes in the money supply.!"6] Whereas there is empirical evidence that there is a long-run positive
correlation between the growth rate of the money stock and the rate of inflation, the quantity theory
has proved unreliable in the short- and medium-run time horizon relevant to monetary policy and is

abandoned as a practical guideline by most central banks today, |"7]
Open economy macroeconomics [eit]

Open economy macroeconomics deals with the consequences of international

trade in goods, financial assets and possibly factor markets like labor migration and international
relocation of firms (physical capital). It explores what determines import, export, the balance of
trade and over longer horizons the accumulation of net foreign assets. An important topic is the role
of exchange rates and the pros and cons of maintaining a fixed exchange rate system or even

a currency union like the Economic and Monetary Union of the European Union, drawing on the
research literature on optimum currency areas_|5]

Development {exit}

Main article: History of macroeconomic thought

Macroeconomics as a separate field of research and study is
generally recognized to start with the publication of John Maynard
Keynes' The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and
Money in 1936,!"8Il"91I51:526 The terms "macrodynamics" and
"macroanalysis" were introduced by Ragnar Frisch in 1933, and
Lawrence Klein in 1946 used the word "macroeconomics" itself in
a journal title in 1946.!18] but naturally several of the themes which
are central to macroeconomic research had been discussed by
thoughtful economists and other writers long before 1936.|'8]

Before Keynes [edit]

In particular, macroeconomic questions before Keynes were the
topic of the two long-standing traditions of business cycle

theory and monetary theory. William Stanley Jevons was one of
the pioneers of the first tradition, whereas the quantity theory of

 

John Maynard Keynes is

money, labelled the oldest surviving theory in economics, as an considered the initiator of
example of the second was described already in the 16th century macroeconomics when he

by Martin de Azpilcueta and later discussed by personalities published his work The General
like John Locke and David Hume. In the first decades of the 20th Theory of Employment, Interest,
century monetary theory was dominated by the eminent and Money in 1936.

economists Alfred Marshall, Knut Wicksell and Irving Fisher.!"8

Keynes and Keynesian economics [edit]

When the Great Depression struck, the reigning economists had difficulty explaining how goods could
go unsold and workers could be left unemployed. In the prevailing neoclassical economics paradigm,
prices and wages would drop until the market cleared, and all goods and labor were sold. Keynes in
his main work, the General Theory, initiated what is known as the Keynesian revolution. He offered a
new interpretation of events and a whole intellectural framework - a novel theory of economics that
explained why markets might not clear, which would evolve into a school of thought known

as Keynesian economics, also called Keynesianism or Keynesian theory, |51:526

In Keynes' theory, aggregate demand - by Keynes called "effective demand" - was key to determining
output. Even if Keynes conceded that output might eventually return to a medium-run equilibrium (or
"potential") level, the process would be slow at best. Keynes coined the term liquidity preference (his
preferred name for what is also known as money demand) and explained how monetary policy might
affect aggregate demand, at the same time offering clear policy recommendations for an active role of
fiscal policy in stabilizing aggregate demand and hence output and employment. In addition, he
explained how the multiplier effect would magnify a small decrease in consumption or investment and
cause declines throughout the economy, and noted the role that uncertainty and animal spirits can
play in the economy. !91:526

The generation following Keynes combined the macroeconomics of the General Theory with
neoclassical microeconomics to create the neoclassical synthesis. By the 1950s, most economists
had accepted the synthesis view of the macroeconomy.|9!:526 Economists like Paul

Samuelson, Franco Modigliani, James Tobin, and Robert Solow developed formal Keynesian models
and contributed formal theories of consumption, investment, and money demand that fleshed out the
Keynesian framework. !5!:527

Monetarism | ccit]

Milton Friedman updated the quantity theory of money to include a role for money demand. He argued
that the role of money in the economy was sufficient to explain the Great Depression, and that
aggregate demand oriented explanations were not necessary. Friedman also argued that monetary
policy was more effective than fiscal policy; however, Friedman doubted the government's ability to
"fine-tune" the economy with monetary policy. He generally favored a policy of steady growth in money
supply instead of frequent intervention, !9!:528

Friedman also challenged the original simple Phillips curve relationship between inflation and
unemployment. Friedman and Edmund Phelps (who was not a monetarist) proposed an "augmented"
version of the Phillips curve that excluded the possibility of a stable, long-run tradeoff between inflation
and unemployment.!2°! When the oil shocks of the 1970s created a high unemployment and high
inflation, Friedman and Phelps were vindicated. Monetarism was particularly influential in the early
1980s, but fell out of favor when central banks found the results disappointing when trying to target
money supply instead of interest rates as monetarists recommended, concluding that the relationships
between money growth, inflation and real GDP growth are too unstable to be useful in practical
monetary policy making.!21]

New classical economics [ccit]

New classical macroeconomics further challenged the Keynesian school. A central development in
new classical thought came when Robert Lucas introduced rational expectations to macroeconomics.
Prior to Lucas, economists had generally used adaptive expectations where agents were assumed to
look at the recent past to make expectations about the future. Under rational expectations, agents are
assumed to be more sophisticated |5!530 Consumers will not simply assume a 2% inflation rate just
because that has been the average the past few years; they will look at current monetary policy and
economic conditions to make an informed forecast. In the new classical models with rational
expectations, monetary policy only had a limited impact.

Lucas also made an influential critique of Keynesian empirical models. He argued that forecasting
models based on empirical relationships would keep producing the same predictions even as the
underlying model generating the data changed. He advocated models based on fundamental
economic theory (i.e. having an explicit microeconomic foundation) that would, in principle, be
structurally accurate as economies changed. |5!:53°

Following Lucas's critique, new classical economists, led by Edward C. Prescott and Finn E. Kydland,
created real business cycle (RBC) models of the macro economy. RBC models were created by
combining fundamental equations from neo-classical microeconomics to make quantitative models. In
order to generate macroeconomic fluctuations, RBC models explained recessions and unemployment
with changes in technology instead of changes in the markets for goods or money. Critics of RBC
models argue that technological changes, which typically diffuse slowly throughout the economy, could
hardly generate the large short-run output fluctuations that we observe. In addition, there is strong
empirical evidence that monetary policy does affect real economic activity, and the idea that
technological regress can explain recent recessions seems implausible. !°!:59316): 195

Despite criticism of the realism in the RBC models, they have been very influential in economic
methodology by providing the first examples of general equilibrium models based on microeconomic
foundations and a specification of underlying shocks that aim to explain the main features of
macroeconomic fluctuations, not only qualitatively, but also quantitatively. In this way, they were
forerunners of the later DSGE models. !°!:194

New Keynesian response [edit]

New Keynesian economists responded to the new classical school by adopting rational expectations
and focusing on developing micro-founded models that were immune to the Lucas critique. Like
classical models, new classical models had assumed that prices would be able to adjust perfectly and
monetary policy would only lead to price changes. New Keynesian models investigated sources

of sticky prices and wages due to imperfect competition, |22] which would not adjust, allowing monetary
policy to impact quantities instead of prices. Stanley Fischer and John B. Taylor produced early work
in this area by showing that monetary policy could be effective even in models with rational
expectations when contracts locked in wages for workers. Other new Keynesian economists,
including Olivier Blanchard, Janet Yellen, Julio Rotemberg, Greg Mankiw, David Romer, and Michael
Woodford, expanded on this work and demonstrated other cases where various market imperfections
caused inflexible prices and wages leading in turn to monetary and fiscal policy having real effects.
Other researchers focused on imperferctions in labor markets, developing models of efficiency

wages or search and matching (SAM) models, or imperfections in credit markets like Ben

Bernanke. [51:582-36

By the late 1990s, economists had reached a rough consensus.!2°! The market imperfections and
nominal rigidities of new Keynesian theory was combined with rational expectations and the RBC
methodology to produce a new and popular type of models called dynamic stochastic general
equilibrium (DSGE) models. The fusion of elements from different schools of thought has been
dubbed the new neoclassical synthesis. !241125] These models are now used by many central banks and
are a core part of contemporary macroeconomics, !*!:55-36

2007-2008 financial crisis | edit)

The 2007-2008 financial crisis, which led to the Great Recession, led to major reassessment of
macroeconomics, which as a field generally had neglected the potential role of financial institutions in
the economy. After the crisis, macroeconomic researchers have turned their attention in several new
directions:

e the financial system and the nature of macrofinancial linkages and frictions, studying leverage,
liquidity and complexity problems in the financial sector, the use of macroprudential tools and the
dangers of an unsustainable public debt!!:53726]

e increased emphasis on empirical work as part of the so-called credibility revolution in economics,
using improved methods to distinguish between correlation and causality to improve future policy
discussions!2/]

e interest in understanding the importance of heterogeneity among the economic agents, leading
among other examples to the construction of heterogeneous agent new Keynesian models (HANK
models), which may potentially also improve understanding of the impact of macroeconomics on
the income distribution!28l

e understanding the implications of integrating the findings of the increasingly useful behavioral
economics literature into macroeconomics"! and behavioral finance

Growth models [edit]

Research in the economics of the determinants behind long-run economic growth has followed its own
course.!°°l The Harrod-Domar model from the 1940s attempted to build a long-run growth model
inspired by Keynesian demand-driven considerations.!°"] The Solow-Swan model worked out

by Robert Solow and, independently, Trevor Swan in the 1950s achieved more long-lasting success,
however, and is still today a common textbook model for explaining economic growth in the long-
run./°2] The model operates with a production function where national output is the product of two
inputs: capital and labor. The Solow model assumes that labor and capital are used at constant rates
without the fluctuations in unemployment and capital utilization commonly seen in business

cycles.!**I |n this model, increases in output, i.e. economic growth, can only occur because of an
increase in the capital stock, a larger population, or technological advancements that lead to higher
productivity (total factor productivity). An increase in the savings rate leads to a temporary increase as
the economy creates more capital, which adds to output. However, eventually the depreciation rate will
limit the expansion of capital: savings will be used up replacing depreciated capital, and no savings
will remain to pay for an additional expansion in capital. Solow's model suggests that economic growth
in terms of output per capita depends solely on technological advances that enhance

productivity. [54] The Solow model can be interpreted as a special case of the more general Ramsey
growth model, where households' savings rates are not constant as in the Solow model, but derived
from an explicit intertemporal utility function.

In the 1980s and 1990s endogenous growth theory arose to challenge the neoclassical growth theory
of Ramsey and Solow. This group of models explains economic growth through factors such as
increasing returns to scale for capital and learning-by-doing that are endogenously determined instead
of the exogenous technological improvement used to explain growth in Solow's model.!°5! Another
type of endogenous growth models endogenized the process of technological progress by

modelling research and development activities by profit-maximizing firms explicitly within the growth
models themselves.!”1:280-308

Environmental and climate issues [edit]

Since the 1970s, various environmental problems have been integrated into growth and other
macroeconomic models to study their implications more thoroughly. During the oil crises of the 1970s
when scarcity problems of natural resources were high on the public agenda, economists like Joseph
Stiglitz and Robert Solow introduced non-renewable resources into neoclassical growth models to
study the possibilities of maintaining growth in living standards under these conditions, !7/:291-39 More
recently, the issue of climate change and the possibilities of a sustainable development are examined
in so-called integrated assessment models, pioneered by William Nordhaus.'°6l |n macroeconomic
models in environmental economics, the economic system is dependant upon the environment. In this
case, the circular flow of income diagram may be replaced by a more complex flow diagram reflecting
the input of solar energy, which sustains natural inputs and environmental services which are then
used as units of production. Once consumed, natural inputs pass out of the economy as pollution and
waste. The potential of an environment to provide services and materials is referred to as an
"environment's source function", and this function is depleted as resources are consumed or pollution
contaminates the resources. The "sink function" describes an environment's ability to absorb and
render harmless waste and pollution: when waste output exceeds the limit of the sink function, long-
term damage occurs.!971:8
Macroeconomic policy {edit} The Earth's biosphere
Solar energy a

The division into various time frames of macroeconomic research

leads to a parallel division of macroeconomic policies into short-

 

Waste

/ Natural

run policies aimed at mitigating the harmful consequences of j[ resources cea \
business cycles (known as stabilization policy) and medium- and j Enemy |. the | Deataded |

| economic | SNeTGY

long-run policies targeted at improving the structural levels of Materials | 5¥5tEM | Degraded

. 1 ——_—————————’t materials |
macroeconomic variables.!71: 18 \ | necyctea mae =
\ Recycled materials | /

 

   

Stabilization policy is usually implemented through two sets of \ 5
tools: fiscal and monetary policy. Both forms of policy are used
to stabilize the economy, i.e. limiting the effects of the business 7 nepade

cycle by conducting expansive policy when the economy is in

. : oe + 5138] Natural resources flow through
a recession or contractive policy in the case of overheating.
the economy and end up as waste

Structural policies may be labor market policies which aim to and pollution.
change the structural unemployment rate or policies which affect

long-run propensities to save, invest, or engage in education or

research and development.!7/:19

Monetary policy [exit]
Further information: Monetary policy

Central banks conduct monetary policy mainly by adjusting short-term interest rates. The actual
method through which the interest rate is changed differs from central bank to central bank, but
typically the implementation happens either directly via administratively changing the central bank's
own offered interest rates or indirectly via open market operations. 4°]

Via the monetary transmission mechanism, interest rate changes

affect investment, consumption, asset prices like stock prices and house prices, and

through exchange rate reactions export and import. In this way aggregate demand, employment and
ultimately inflation is affected.!4"] Expansionary monetary policy lowers interest rates, increasing
economic activity, whereas contractionary monetary policy raises interest rates. In the case of a fixed
exchange rate system, interest rate decisions together with direct intervention by central banks on
exchange rate dynamics are major tools to control the exchange rate./42

In developed countries, most central banks follow inflation targeting, focusing on keeping medium-
term inflation close to an explicit target, say 2%, or within an explicit range. This includes the Federal
Reserve and the European Central Bank, which are generally considered to follow a strategy very
close to inflation targeting, even though they do not officially label themselves as inflation

targeters. [49] In practice, an official inflation targeting often leaves room for the central bank to also
help stabilize output and employment, a strategy known as "flexible inflation

targeting".!44] Most emerging economies focus their monetary policy on maintaining a fixed exchange
rate regime, aligning their currency with one or more foreign currencies, typically the US dollar or

the euro.!45]

Conventional monetary policy can be ineffective in situations such as a liquidity trap. When nominal
interest rates are near zero, central banks cannot loosen monetary policy through conventional
means. In that situation, they may use unconventional monetary policy such as quantitative easing to
help stabilize output. Quantity easing can be implemented by buying not only government bonds, but
also other assets such as corporate bonds, stocks, and other securities. This allows lower interest
rates for a broader class of assets beyond government bonds. A similar strategy is to lower long-term
interest rates by buying long-term bonds and selling short-term bonds to create a flat yield curve,
known in the US as Operation Twist./46]

Fiscal policy [edit]
Further information: Fiscal policy

Fiscal policy is the use of government's revenue (taxes) and expenditure as instruments to influence
the economy.

For example, if the economy is producing less than potential output, government spending can be
used to employ idle resources and boost output, or taxes could be lowered to boost private
consumption which has a similar effect. Government spending or tax cuts do not have to make up for
the entire output gap. There is a multiplier effect that affects the impact of government spending. For
instance, when the government pays for a bridge, the project not only adds the value of the bridge to
output, but also allows the bridge workers to increase their consumption and investment, which helps
to close the output gap.

The effects of fiscal policy can be limited by partial or full crowding out. When the government takes
on spending projects, it limits the amount of resources available for the private sector to use. Full
crowding out occurs in the extreme case when government spending simply replaces private sector
output instead of adding additional output to the economy. A crowding out effect may also occur if
government spending should lead to higher interest rates, which would limit investment.|47]

Some fiscal policy is implemented through automatic stabilizers without any active decisions by
politicians. Automatic stabilizers do not suffer from the policy lags of discretionary fiscal policy.
Automatic stabilizers use conventional fiscal mechanisms, but take effect as soon as the economy
takes a downturn: spending on unemployment benefits automatically increases when unemployment
rises, and tax revenues decrease, which shelters private income and consumption from part of the fall
in market income.!7!:657

Comparison of fiscal and monetary policy [ccit}

There is a general consensus that both monetary and fiscal instruments may affect demand and
activity in the short run (i.e. over the business cycle), [71657 Economists usually favor monetary over
fiscal policy to mitigate moderate fluctuations, however, because it has two major advantages. First,
monetary policy is generally implemented by independent central banks instead of the political
institutions that control fiscal policy. Independent central banks are less likely to be subject to political
pressures for overly expansionary policies. Second, monetary policy may suffer shorter inside

lags and outside lags than fiscal policy.!°°! There are some exceptions, however: Firstly, in the case of
a major shock, monetary stabilization policy may not be sufficient and should be supplemented by
active fiscal stabilization.!71:659 Secondly, in the case of a very low interest level, the economy may be
in a liquidity trap in which monetary policy becomes ineffective, which makes fiscal policy the more
potent tool to stabilize the economy.!*! Thirdly, in regimes where monetary policy is tied to fulfilling
other targets, in particular fixed exchange rate regimes, the central bank cannot simultaneously adjust
its interest rates to mitigate domestic business cycle fluctuations, making fiscal policy the only usable
tool for such countries. |42]

Macroeconomic models [eit

Further information: Macroeconomic model
Macroeconomic teaching, research and informed debates normally evolve around formal
(diagrammatic or equational) macroeconomic models to clarify assumptions and show their
consequences in a precise way. Models include simple theoretical models, often containing only a few
equations, used in teaching and research to highlight key basic principles, and larger applied
quantitative models used by e.g. governments, central banks, think tanks and international
organisations to predict effects of changes in economic policy or other exogenous factors or as a basis
for making economic forecasting. 48)

Well-known specific theoretical models include short-term models like the Keynesian cross, the IS-LM
model and the Mundell—Fleming model, medium-term models like the AD—AS model, building upon

a Phillips curve, and long-term growth models like the Solow—Swan model, the Ramsey—Cass—
Koopmans model and Peter Diamond's overlapping generations model. Quantitative models include
early large-scale macroeconometric model, the new classical real business cycle models,
microfounded computable general equilibrium (CGE) models used for medium-term (structural)
questions like international trade or tax reforms, Dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE)
models used to analyze business cycles, not least in many central banks, or integrated

assessment models like DICE.

Specific models [eait]

IS-LM model [edit]

The IS-LM model, invented by John Hicks in 1936, gives the
underpinnings of aggregate demand (itself discussed below). It
answers the question "At any given price level, what is the quantity
of goods demanded?" The graphic model shows combinations of
interest rates and output that ensure equilibrium in both the goods
and money markets under the model's assumptions.'*°! The goods
market is modeled as giving equality between investment and
public and private saving (IS), and the money market is modeled
as giving equilibrium between the money supply and liquidity
preference (equivalent to money demana).!5°!

The IS curve consists of the points (combinations of income and
interest rate) where investment, given the interest rate, is equal to
public and private saving, given output.!5"! The IS curve is

 

In this example of a traditional IS—

downward sloping because output and the interest rate have an LM chart, the IS curve moves to
inverse relationship in the goods market: as output increases, the right, causing higher interest
more income is saved, which means interest rates must be lower rates (i) and expansion in the

to spur enough investment to match saving.!°"] "real" economy (real GDP, or Y).

The traditional LM curve is upward sloping because the interest

rate and output have a positive relationship in the money market: as income (identically equal to
output in a closed economy) increases, the demand for money increases, resulting in a rise in the
interest rate in order to just offset the incipient rise in money demand.|®?!

The IS-LM model is often used in elementary textbooks to demonstrate the effects of monetary and
fiscal policy, though it ignores many complexities of most modern macroeconomic models. !4°! A
problem related to the LM curve is that modern central banks largely ignore the money supply in
determining policy, contrary to the model's basic assumptions. |°!:262 In some modern textbooks,
consequently, the traditional IS-LM model has been modified by replacing the traditional LM curve with
an assumption that the central bank simply determines the interest rate of the economy
directly.{6l:19415]:113
AD-AS model [edit]

The AD-AS model is a common textbook model for explaining the Pp

  
  

53 we . Potential Short-run
macroeconomy.! I The original version of the model shows the output aggregate
price level and level of real output given the equilibrium supply

in aggregate demand and aggregate supply. The aggregate
demand curve's downward slope means that more output is
demanded at lower price levels.!*] The downward slope can be
explained as the result of three effects: the Pigou or real balance
effect, which states that as real prices fall, real wealth increases,
resulting in higher consumer demand of goods; the Keynes or

Price Level

interest rate effect, which states that as prices fall, the demand for Real Output v Y
money decreases, causing interest rates to decline and borrowing A traditional AD-AS diagram

for investment and consumption to increase; and the net export showing a shift in AD, and the AS
effect, which states that as prices rise, domestic goods become curve becoming inelastic beyond

comparatively more expensive to foreign consumers, leading to a

decline in exports, $4] Potential output

In many representations of the AD—AS model, the aggregate supply curve is horizontal at low levels of
output and becomes inelastic near the point of potential output, which corresponds with full
employment.!5%! Since the economy cannot produce beyond the potential output, any AD expansion
will lead to higher price levels instead of higher output.

In modern textbooks, the AD—AS model is often presented sligthly differently, however, in a diagram
showing not the price level, but the inflation rate along the vertical axis, [6]:263[11]:399-428[7]:595 making
it easier to relate the diagram to real-world policy discussions.!’1:“"' In this framework, the AD curve is
downward sloping because higher inflation will cause the central bank, which is assumed to follow

an inflation target, to raise the interest rate which will dampen economic activity, hence reducing
output. The AS curve is upward sloping following a standard modern Phillips curve thought, in which a
higher level of economic activity lowers unemployment, leading to higher wage growth and in turn
higher inflation. |61:263


--- End of macroeconimics.pdf ---
--- Start of Personal Finanace.pdf ---
What Is Personal Finance?

Personal finance is a term that covers managing your money as well as saving and
investing. It encompasses budgeting, banking, insurance, mortgages, investments, and
retirement, tax, and estate planning. The term often refers to the entire industry that
provides financial services to individuals and households and advises them about financial
and investment opportunities.

Individual goals and desires—and a plan to fulfill those needs within your financial
constraints—also impact how you approach the above items. To make the most of your
income and savings, it’s essential to become financially savvy—it will help you distinguish
between good and bad advice and make intelligent financial decisions.

KEY TAKEAWAYS

e Few schools have courses on managing your money, so it is important to learn
how through free online articles, courses, blogs, podcasts, or books.

e The core areas of managing personal finance include income, spending, savings,
investments, and protection.

e Smart personal finance involves developing strategies that include budgeting,
creating an emergency fund, paying off debt, using credit cards wisely, saving for
retirement, and much more.

¢ Being disciplined is important, but it’s also good to know when you shouldn't
adhere to the guidelines.

The Importance of Personal Finance

Personal finance is about meeting your personal financial goals. These goals could be
anything—having enough for short-term financial needs, planning for retirement, or saving
for your child’s college education. It depends on your income, spending, saving, investing,
and personal protection (insurance and estate planning).

Not understanding how to manage finances or be financially disciplined has led Americans
to accumulate enormous debt. In August 2024, the Federal Reserve Bank reported
household debt had increased by $3.7 trillion since December 2019, prior to the recession.
In addition, the following balances increased from the first quarter of 2024 to the second: 1

¢ Credit card balances: Up by $27 billion

¢ Auto loans: Up by $10 billion

¢« Consumer loans and store cards: Up by $1 billion
¢ Total non-housing: Up by $28 billion

¢ Mortgages: Up by $77 billion
Student loans remained unchanged, at about $1.6 trillion.

Americans are taking on an ever-increasing amount of debt to finance purchases, making
managing personal finances more critical than ever, especially when inflation is eating
away at purchasing power and prices are rising.

Areas of Personal Finance

The five areas of personal finance are income, saving, spending, investing, and protection.

Income

Income is the starting point of personal finance. It is the entire amount of cash inflow that
you receive and can allocate to expenses, savings, investments, and protection. Income is
all the money you bring in. This includes salaries, wages, dividends, and other sources of
cash inflow.

Spending

Spending is an outflow of cash and typically where the bulk of income goes. Spending is
whatever an individual uses their income to buy. This includes rent, mortgage, groceries,
hobbies, eating out, home furnishings, home repairs, travel, and entertainment.

Being able to manage spending is a critical aspect of personal finance. Individuals must
ensure their spending is less than their income; otherwise, they won't have enough money
to cover their expenses or will fall into debt. Debt can be devastating financially,
particularly with the high-interest rates credit cards charge.

 

Saving
Savings is the income left over after spending. Everyone should aim to have savings to
cover large expenses or emergencies. However, this means not using all your income,
which can be difficult. Regardless of the difficulty, everyone should strive to have at least a
portion of savings to meet any fluctuations in income and spending—somewhere between
three and 12 months of expenses.

Beyond that, cash idling in a savings account becomes wasteful because it loses
purchasing power to inflation over time. Instead, cash not tied up in an emergency or
spending account should be placed in something that will help it maintain its value or
grow, such as investments.

Investing

Investing involves purchasing assets, usually stocks and bonds, to earn a return on the
money invested. Investing aims to increase an individual's wealth beyond the amount they
invested. Investing does come with risks, as not all assets appreciate and can incur a loss.

Investing can be difficult for those unfamiliar with it—it helps to dedicate some time to gain
an understanding through readings and studying. If you don't have time, you might benefit
from hiring a professional to help you invest your money.

Protection

Protection refers to the methods people take to protect themselves from unexpected
events, such as illnesses or accidents, and as a means to preserve wealth. Protection
includes life and health insurance and estate and retirement planning.

Personal Finance Services

Several financial planning services fall under one or more of the five areas. You're likely to
find many businesses that provide these services to clients to help them plan and manage
their finances. These services include:

« Wealth Management
e Loans and Debt
Budgeting
Retirement

Taxes

Risk Management

e Estate Planning
Investments
Insurance

Credit Cards

Home and Mortgage
Personal Finance Strategies

The sooner you start financial planning, the better, but it’s never too late to create financial
goals to give yourself and your family financial security and freedom. Here are the best
practices and tips for personal finance.

 

The 2022 Investopedia Financial Literacy Survey surveyed 4,000 adults and
found that most Americans are concerned about personal finance basics,
retirement funding, and investing in crypto.

 

1. Know Your income

It's all for nothing if you don't know how much you bring home after taxes and withholding.
So before deciding anything, ensure you know exactly how much take-home pay you
receive.

2. Devise a Budget

A budget is essential to living within your means and saving enough to meet your long-
term goals. The 50/30/20 budgeting method offers a great framework. It breaks down like
this:

e Fifty percent of your take-home pay or net income (after taxes) goes toward living
essentials, such as rent, utilities, groceries, and transport.

e Thirty percent is allocated to discretionary expenses, such as dining out and shopping
for clothes. Giving to charity can go here as well.

e Twenty percent goes toward the future—paying down debt and saving for retirement
and emergencies.

It’s never been easier to manage money, thanks to a growing number of smartphone
personal budgeting apps that put day-to-day finances in the palm of your hand. Here are
just two examples:

e YNAB (You Need a Budget) helps you track and adjust your spending to control every

dollar you spend.
e PocketGuard is available in both free and paid versions. It uses an algorithm to help

you avoid overspending by analyzing your income, bills, goals, and budget.

3. Pay Yourself First

It’s important to “pay yourself first” to ensure money is set aside for unexpected expenses,
such as medical bills, a significant car repair, day-to-day expenses if you get laid off, and
more. The ideal safety net is three to 12 months of living expenses.
Financial experts generally recommend putting away 20% of each paycheck every month.

 

20% toward other financial goals, such as a retirement fund or a down payment on a
home.

4. Limit and Reduce Debt

It sounds simple enough: Don't spend more than you earn to keep debt from getting out of
hand. But, of course, most people have to borrow from time to time, and sometimes going
into debt can be advantageous—for example, if it leads to acquiring an asset. Taking out a
mortgage to buy a house might be one such case. Still, leasing sometimes can be more
economical than buying outright, whether renting a property, leasing a car, or even getting
a subscription to computer software.

 

 

On the other hand, minimizing repayments (to interest only, for instance) can free up
income to invest elsewhere or put into retirement savings while you’re young when your
nest egg gets the maximum benefit from compounding interest. Some private and federal
student loans are even eligible for a rate reduction if the borrower enrolls in auto pay. 2

 

Student loans account for $1.59 trillion of consumer debt—if you have an outstanding
student loan, you should prioritize it.1 There are myriad loan repayment plans and
payment reduction strategies available. If you’re stuck with a high interest rate, paying off
the principal faster can make sense.

e Graduated repayment—progressively increases the monthly payment over 10 years

e Extended repayment—stretches out the loan over a period that can be as long as 25
years

e Income-driven repayment—limits payments to 10% to 20% of your income (based on
your income and family size)

5. Only Borrow What You Can Repay

Credit cards can be major debt traps, but it’s unrealistic not to own any in the
contemporary world. Furthermore, they have applications beyond buying things. They are
crucial to establishing your credit rating and a great way to track spending, which can be a
considerable budgeting aid.

Credit needs to be managed correctly, meaning you should pay off your entire balance
every month or keep your credit utilization ratio at a minimum (that is, Keep your account
balances below 30% of your total available credit). 4

 
Given the extraordinary reward and incentives offered these days (such as cashback), it
makes sense to charge as many purchases as possible—if you can pay your bills in full.

Avoid maxing out credit cards at all costs, and always pay bills on time. One of
the fastest ways to ruin your credit score is to constantly pay bills late—or even
worse, miss payments.

Using a debit card, which takes money directly from your bank account, is another way to
ensure that you will not be paying for accumulated small purchases over an extended
period with interest.

6. Monitor Your Credit Score

Credit cards are the primary vehicle through which your credit score is built and
maintained, so watching credit spending goes hand in hand with monitoring your credit
score. If you ever want to obtain a lease, mortgage, or any other type of financing, then
you'll need a solid credit report. There are a variety of credit scores available, but the most
popular one is the FICO score. 5

Factors that determine your FICO score include: 6

e« Payment history (35%)

e Amounts owed (30%)

e Length of credit history (15%)
e Credit mix (10%)

e New credit (10%)

FICO scores are calculated from 300 to 850.7 Here’s how your credit is rated: s

e Exceptional: 800 to 850
e Very good: 740 to 799
e¢ Good: 670 to 739

e Fair: 580 to 669

e Poor: 579 and below

To pay bills, set up direct debiting where possible (so you never miss a payment) and
subscribe to reporting agencies that provide regular credit score updates. In addition, you
can detect and address mistakes or fraudulent activity by monitoring your credit report.
Federal law allows you to obtain free credit reports once a year from the “Big Three”
major credit bureaus: Equifax, Experian, and TransUnion. 9
Reports can be obtained directly from each agency, or you can sign up at
AnnualCreditReport.com, a federally authorized site sponsored by the Big Three.

Some credit card providers, such as Capital One, will provide customers with
complimentary, regular credit score updates, but it may not be your FICO score. Instead,
Capital One's CreditWise program offers your VantageScore. 10

Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the three major credit bureaus are providing
free credit reports weekly. The program was extended twice in 2022 and it is
now permanent. 11

7. Plan for Your Future

To protect the assets in your estate and ensure that your wishes are followed when you
die, be sure you make a will and—depending on your needs—possibly set up one or
more trusts. You also should look into insurance and find ways to reduce your premiums, if

 

policy to ensure it meets your family’s needs through life’s major milestones.

Other critical documents include a living will and a healthcare power of attorney. While not
all of these documents directly affect you, all of them can save your next of kin
considerable time and expense when you fall ill or become otherwise incapacitated.

Retirement may seem like a lifetime away, but it arrives much sooner than expected.
Experts suggest that most people will need about 80% of their current salary in retirement.
The younger you start, the more you benefit from what advisors call the magic of
compounding interest—how small amounts grow over time.

Setting aside money now for your retirement not only allows it to grow over the long term
but also can reduce your current income taxes if funds are placed in a tax-
advantaged plan, such as an individual retirement account (IRA), a 401(k), or a 403(b).

While your children are young, take the time to teach them about the value of
money and how to save, invest, and spend wisely.

If your employer offers a 401(k) or 403(b) plan, start paying into it immediately, especially
if your employer matches your contribution. By not doing so, you’re giving up free money.
Take time to learn the difference between a Roth 401(k) and a traditional 401(k) if your
company offers both.
Investing is only one part of planning for retirement. Other strategies include waiting as
long as possible before opting to receive Social Security benefits (which is smart for most
people) and converting a term life insurance policy to permanent life.

8. Buy Insurance

As you age, it's natural for you to accumulate many of the same things your parents did—
a family, home or apartment, belongings, and health issues. Insurance can be expensive if
you wait too long to get it. Health care, long-term care insurance, life insurance; it all
increases in cost the older you get. Additionally, you never know what life will send your
way. If you're the sole breadwinner for the family, or you and your partner both work to
make ends meet, a lot depends on your ability to work.

Insurance can cover most of the hospital bills as you age, leaving your hard-earned
savings in your family's hands; medical expenses are one of the leading reasons for debt.
12 If something happens to you, life insurance can give those you leave behind a buffer
zone to deal with the loss and get back on their feet financially.

9. Maximize Tax Breaks

Due to an overly complex tax code, many people leave hundreds or even thousands of
dollars sitting on the table every year. By maximizing your tax savings, you'll free up
money that can be invested in your reduction of past debts, enjoyment of the present, and
plans for the future.

You should start saving receipts and tracking expenditures for all possible tax
deductions and tax credits. Many office supply stores sell helpful “tax organizers” that
have the main categories already labeled.

After you’re organized, you'll want to focus on taking advantage of every tax deduction
and credit available, as well as deciding between the two when necessary. In short, a tax
deduction reduces the amount of income on which you are taxed, whereas a tax credit
reduces the amount of tax that you owe. This means that a $1,000 tax credit will save you
much more than a $1,000 deduction. 13

10. Give Yourself a Break

Budgeting and planning can seem full of deprivations. Make sure you reward yourself now
and then. Whether it’s a vacation, a purchase, or an occasional night on the town, you
need to enjoy the fruits of your labor. Doing so gives you a taste of the financial
independence you're working so hard for.

Last but not least, don’t forget to delegate when needed. Even though you might be
competent enough to do your own taxes or manage a portfolio of individual stocks, it
doesn’t mean you should. Setting up an account at a brokerage and spending a few
hundred dollars on a certified public accountant (CPA) or a financial planner—at least
once—might be a good way to jump-start your planning.

 

Personal Finance Skills

The key to getting your finances on the right track is using skills you likely already have.
It’s also about understanding that the principles that contribute to success in business and
your career work just as well in personal money management. Three key skills are finance
prioritization, assessing the costs and benefits, and restraining your spending.

Finance Prioritization: This means that you can look at your finances, discern what
keeps the money flowing in, and make sure that you stay focused on those efforts.
Assessing the Costs and Benefits: This key skill keeps professionals from spreading
themselves too thin. Ambitious individuals always have a list of ideas about other ways
that they can hit it big, whether it is a side business or an investment idea. While there
is a place and time for taking a flier, running your finances like a business means
stepping back and honestly assessing the potential costs and benefits of any new
venture.

Restraining Your Spending: This is the final big-picture skill of successful business
management that must be applied to personal finances. Time and again, financial
planners sit down with successful people who still manage to spend more than they
make. Earning $250,000 a year won't do you much good if you spend $275,000
annually. Learning to restrain spending on non-wealth-building assets until after you’ve
met your monthly savings or debt reduction goals is crucial in building net worth.

Personal Finance Education

Personal money management isn't one of the most popular topics in educational systems.
Many college degrees require some financial education, but it isn't geared toward
individuals, which means that most of us will need to get our personal finance

education from our parents (if we’re lucky) or learn it ourselves.

Fortunately, you don’t have to spend much money to find out how to manage it better. You
can learn everything you need to know for free online and in library books. Almost all
media publications regularly dole out personal finance advice, too.

Online Blogs

Reading personal finance blogs is a great way to start learning about personal finance.
Instead of the general advice you'll get in personal finance articles, you'll learn exactly
which challenges real people face and how they address them.

 

 

 

Mr. Money Mustache has hundreds of posts full of insights on escaping the rat race and
retiring early by making unconventional lifestyle choices. CentSai helps you navigate a
myriad of financial decisions via first-person accounts. Million Mile Secrets and The Points
Guy each teach you how to travel for a fraction of the retail price using credit card
rewards. These sites often link to other blogs, so you'll discover more sites as you read.

Of course, we can’t help tooting our own horn in this category. Investopedia offers a
wealth of free personal finance education. You might start with our special sections
on budgeting, buying a home, and planning for retirement—or the thousands of other
articles in our personal finance section.

At the Library

You may need to visit your library in person to get a library card if you don’t already have
one, but after that, you can check out personal finance audiobooks and e-books online
without leaving home. Some of the following best sellers may be available from your local
library: "I Will Teach You to Be Rich," "The Millionaire Next Door,” "Your Money or Your
Life," and "Rich Dad Poor Dad." Personal finance classics such as Personal Finance for
Dummies," "The Total Money Makeover," "The Little Book of Common Sense Investing,"
and "Think and Grow Rich" are also available as audiobooks.

Free Online Classes

If you enjoy the structure of lessons and quizzes, try one of these free digital personal
finance courses:

¢ Morningstar Investing Classroom offers a place for beginning and experienced
investors alike to learn about stocks, funds, bonds, and portfolios. Some of the courses
you'll find include “Stocks Versus Other Investments,” “Methods for Investing in Mutual
Funds,” “Determining Your Asset Mix,” and “Introduction to Government Bonds.” Each
course takes about 10 minutes and is followed by a quiz to help you make sure that
you understood the lesson. 14

e EdX is an online learning platform created by Harvard University and the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 15 It offers at least three courses that cover
personal finance: 'Personal Finance, Part 1: Investing in Yourself" from Wellesley
College, “Personal Finance” from Purdue University, and “Finance for Everyone: Smart
Tools for Decision-Making” from the University of Michigan. These courses will teach
you how credit works, which types of insurance you might want to carry, how to
maximize your retirement savings, how to read your credit report, and what the time
value of money is. 16

¢ “Planning for a Secure Retirement” is an online course from Purdue University. It’s
broken up into 10 main modules, and each has four to six sub-modules on topics such
as Social Security, 401(k) and 403(b) plans, and IRAs. You'll learn about your risk
tolerance, think about what kind of retirement lifestyle you want, and estimate your
retirement expenses. 17
Podcasts

Personal finance podcasts are a great way to learn how to manage your money if you’re
short on free time. While you’re getting ready in the morning, exercising, driving to work,
running errands, or preparing for bed, you can listen to expert advice on becoming more
financially secure. In addition to “The Investopedia Express with Caleb Silver,” you may

find these valuable:

« Freakonomics Radio and NPR’s Planet Money both make economics enjoyable by
using it to explain real-world phenomena such as “how we got from mealy, nasty apples
to apples that actually taste delicious,” the Wells Fargo fake-accounts scandal, and
whether we should still be using cash.

¢« American Public Media’s Marketplace helps make sense of what’s happening in the
business world and the economy.

e¢ So Money with Farnoosh Torabi combines interviews with successful business
people, expert advice, and listeners’ personal finance questions.

The most important thing is to find resources that work for your learning style and that you
find interesting and engaging. If one blog, book, course, or podcast is dull or difficult to
understand, keep trying until you find something that clicks.

Education shouldn’t stop once you learn the basics. The economy changes, and new
financial tools like the budgeting apps mentioned earlier are always being developed. Find
resources you enjoy and trust, and keep refining your money skills through retirement and
beyond.

What Personal Finance Classes Can’t Teach You

Personal finance education is a great idea for consumers, especially people starting out
who want to learn investing basics or about credit management; however, understanding
the basic concepts is not a guaranteed path to financial sense. Human nature can often
derail the best intentions to achieve a perfect credit score or build a substantial retirement
nest egg. These three key character traits can help you stay on track:

 

 

Discipline
One of the most important tenets of personal finance is systematic saving. For example,

say your net earnings are $60,000 per year, and your monthly living expenses—housing,
food, transportation, and the like—amount to $3,200 per month.

There are choices to make surrounding your remaining $1,800 in monthly salary. Ideally,
the first step is to establish an emergency fund or perhaps a tax-advantaged health
savings account (HSA).

 
To be eligible for a health savings account, your health insurance must be
a high-deductible health plan (HDHP). 18

Establishing an emergency fund takes financial discipline—without it, giving in to the
temptation to spend rather than save can have dire consequences. In the event of an
emergency, you may not have the money to pay the expenses—leading you to finance
them through debt.

Once you have your emergency stash, you'll need to develop investing discipline—it’s not
just for institutional money managers who make their living buying and selling stocks.
Average retail investors tend to do better by setting an investment target and abiding by it
rather than buying and selling stocks trying to time the market.

A Sense of Timing

Timing can be crucial. For instance, imagine you're three years out of college, have
established your emergency fund, and want to reward yourself. A Jet Ski costs $3,000, but
you want to start investing also. "Investing in growth stocks can wait another year," you
say. "| have plenty of time to launch an investment portfolio."

However, putting off investing for one year can have significant consequences. The
opportunity cost of buying a personal watercraft can be illustrated through the time value
of money.

The $3,000 used to buy the Jet Ski would have amounted to nearly $49,000 in 40 years at
7% interest, a reasonable average annual return for a growth mutual fund over the long
haul. Thus, delaying the decision to invest wisely may likewise delay the ability to reach
your goal of retiring at age 65.

Doing tomorrow what you could do today also extends to debt payment. If you were to put
the Jet Ski on your credit card, the $3,000 credit card balance would take 222 months
(18.5 years) to pay off if you only made minimum payments of $75 each month. And don’t
forget the interest you’re paying: at an 18% annual percentage rate (APR), it comes to
$3,923 over those months. So, if you were to plunk down the $3,000 to pay the balance
rather than let it compound, you'd see substantial savings—nearly $1,000.

 

 

Emotional Detachment

Personal finance matters are business, and business should not be personal. A difficult but
necessary facet of sound financial decision-making involves removing emotions from a
transaction.
Making impulsive purchases feels good but can significantly impact long-term

investment goals. So can making unwise loans to family members. Your cousin Fred, who
has already burned your brother and sister, will likely not pay you back, either. The smart
thing to do is decline his requests for help—you're trying to make ends meet also.

The key to prudent personal financial management is to separate feelings from reason.
However, when loved ones are experiencing real trouble, it pays to help if you can—just
try not to take it out of your investments and retirement.

Many people have loved ones who always seem to need financial help—it is
difficult to refuse to help them. If you include planning to assist them in real
emergencies using your emergency fund, it can make the burden easier.

Breaking Personal Finance Rules

The personal finance realm may have more guidelines and tips to follow than any other.
Although these rules are good to know, everyone has their own circumstances. Here are
some rules prudent people, especially young adults, are never supposed to break—but

can break if necessary.

Saving or Investing a Set Portion of Your Income

An ideal budget includes saving a portion of your paycheck every month for retirement—
usually around 10% to 20%. However, while being fiscally responsible is important and
thinking about your future is crucial, the general rule of saving a given amount for
retirement may not always be the best choice, especially for young people just getting
started.

For one thing, many young adults and students need to consider paying for their biggest
expenses, such as a new car, home, or postsecondary education. Taking away 10% to
20% of available funds would be a definite setback in making those purchases.

Additionally, saving for retirement doesn’t make much sense if you have credit cards or
interest-bearing loans to pay off. The 19% interest rate on your Visa card probably would
negate the returns you get from your balanced mutual fund retirement portfolio five times
over.

Finally, saving money to travel and experience new places and cultures can be especially
rewarding for a young person who’s still unsure about their life path.

Long-term Investing/Investing in Riskier Assets
The rule of thumb for young investors is that they should have a long-term outlook and
stick to a buy-and-hold philosophy. This rule is one of the easier ones to justify breaking.
Adapting to changing markets can be the difference between making money or limiting
your losses and sitting idly by and watching your hard-earned savings shrink. Short-term
investing has its advantages at any age.

Common investing logic suggests that because young investors have such a long
investment time horizon, they should be investing in higher-risk ventures; after all, they
have the rest of their lives to recover from any losses that they may suffer; however, you
don’t have to take on undue risk in your short- to medium-term investments if you don’t
want to.

The idea of diversification is an important part of creating a strong investment portfolio;
this includes both the riskiness of individual stocks and their intended investment horizon.

At the other end of the age spectrum, investors near and at retirement are encouraged to
cut back to the safest investments—even though these may yield less than inflation—to
preserve capital. Taking fewer risks is important as the number of years you have to earn
money and recover from bad financial times dwindles, but at age 60 or 65, you could have
20, 30, or even more years to go. Some growth investments could still make sense for
you.

 

Frequently Asked Questions
What Is Personal Finance?

Personal finance is the knowledge, instruments, and techniques used to manage your
finances. When you understand the principles and concepts behind personal finance, you
can manage debt, savings, living expenses, and retirement savings.

What Are the 5 Main Components of Personal Finance?

The five main components are income, spending, savings, investing, and protection.

What Is an Example of Personal Finance?

One of the key ideas behind personal finance is not to spend more than you make. For
instance, if you make $50,000 a year but spend $65,000, you'll end up with debt that
continues to compound because you'll be spending more than you make to pay for past
expenses.

Why Is Personal Finance So Important?

The concepts behind managing your personal finances can guide you in making intelligent
financial decisions. In addition, the decisions you make throughout your life on what to
buy, sell, hold, or own can affect how you live when you can no longer work.
The Bottom Line

Personal finance is managing your money to cover expenses and save for the future. It is
a topic that covers a broad array of areas, including managing expenses and debt, how to
save and invest, and how to plan for retirement. In addition, it can include ways to protect
yourself with insurance, build wealth, and ensure wealth is passed on to the people you
want it to pass to.

Understanding how to manage your finances is an important life-planning tool that can
help set you up for a life without debt; you gain control of financial stresses and have a
way to manage the expensive surprises that life can throw at you


--- End of Personal Finanace.pdf ---
--- Start of behavioural finance.pdf ---
What Is Behavioral Finance?

Behavioral finance, a subfield of behavioral economics, proposes that psychological
influences and biases affect the financial behaviors of investors and financial practitioners.
Moreover, influences and biases can be the source for the explanation of all types of
market anomalies and specifically market anomalies in the stock market, such as severe
rises or falls in stock price. As behavioral finance is such an integral part of investing, the
Securities and Exchange Commission has staff specifically focused on behavioral finance.

KEY TAKEAWAYS

e Behavioral finance is an area of study focused on how psychological influences
can affect market outcomes.

¢ Behavioral finance can be analyzed to understand different outcomes across a
variety of sectors and industries.

¢ One of the key aspects of behavioral finance studies is the influence of
psychological biases.

e Some common behavioral financial aspects include loss aversion, consensus
bias, and familiarity tendencies.

¢ The efficient market theory which states all equities are priced fairly based on all
available public information is often debunked for not incorporating irrational
emotional behavior.

Understanding Behavioral Finance

Behavioral finance can be analyzed from a variety of perspectives. Stock market returns
are one area of finance where psychological behaviors are often assumed to influence
market outcomes and returns but there are also many different angles for observation.
The purpose of the classification of behavioral finance is to help understand why people
make certain financial choices and how those choices can affect markets.

Within behavioral finance, it is assumed that financial participants are not perfectly
rational and self-controlled but rather psychologically influential with somewhat normal and
self-controlling tendencies. Financial decision-making often relies on the investor's mental
and physical health. As an investor's overall health improves or worsens, their mental
state often changes. This impacts their decision-making and rationality towards all real-
world problems, including those specific to finance.

 

 

One of the key aspects of behavioral finance studies is the influence of biases. Biases can
occur for a variety of reasons. Biases can usually be classified into one of five key
concepts. Understanding and classifying different types of behavioral finance biases can
be very important when narrowing in on the study or analysis of industry or sector
outcomes and results.

Read about Investopedia's 10 Rules of Investing by picking up a copy of our
special issue print edition.

Behavioral Finance Concepts

Behavioral finance typically encompasses five main concepts:

e« Mental accounting: Mental accounting refers to the propensity for people to allocate
money for specific purposes.

e Herd behavior: Herd behavior states that people tend to mimic the financial behaviors
of the majority of the herd. Herding is notorious in the stock market as the cause behind
dramatic rallies and sell-offs.

e« Emotional gap: The emotional gap refers to decision-making based on extreme
emotions or emotional strains such as anxiety, anger, fear, or excitement. Oftentimes,
emotions are a key reason why people do not make rational choices.

e Anchoring: Anchoring refers to attaching a spending level to a certain reference.
Examples may include spending consistently based on a budget level or rationalizing
spending based on different satisfaction utilities.

¢ Self-attribution: Self-attribution refers to a tendency to make choices based on
overconfidence in one's own knowledge or skill. Self-attribution usually stems from an
intrinsic Knack in a particular area. Within this category, individuals tend to rank their
knowledge higher than others, even when it objectively falls short.

Behavioral finance is exploited through credit card rewards, as consumers
are more likely to be willing to spend points, rewards, or miles as opposed to
paying for transactions with direct cash.

Some Biases Revealed by Behavioral Finance

Breaking down biases further, many individual biases and tendencies have been identified
for behavioral finance analysis. Some of these include:

Confirmation Bias

Confirmation bias is when investors have a bias toward accepting information that
confirms their already-held belief in an investment. If information surfaces, investors
accept it readily to confirm that they're correct about their investment decision—even if the
information is flawed.

Experiential Bias

An experiential bias occurs when investors' memory of recent events makes them biased
or leads them to believe that the event is far more likely to occur again. For this reason, it
is also known as recency bias or availability bias.

 

For example, the financial crisis in 2008 and 2009 led many investors to exit the stock
market. Many had a dismal view of the markets and likely expected more economic
hardship in the coming years. The experience of having gone through such a negative
event increased their bias or likelihood that the event could reoccur. In reality, the
economy recovered, and the market bounced back in the years to follow.

Loss Aversion

Loss aversion occurs when investors place a greater weighting on the concern for losses
than the pleasure from market gains. In other words, they're far more likely to try to assign
a higher priority to avoiding losses than making investment gains.

As a result, some investors might want a higher payout to compensate for losses. If the
high payout isn't likely, they might try to avoid losses altogether even if the investment's
risk is acceptable from a rational standpoint.

Applying loss aversion to investing, the so-called disposition effect occurs when investors
sell their winners and hang onto their losers. Investors’ thinking is that they want to realize
gains quickly. However, when an investment is losing money, they'll hold onto it because
they want to get back to even or their initial price. Investors tend to admit they are correct
about an investment quickly (when there's a gain).

However, investors are reluctant to admit when they made an investment mistake (when
there's a loss). The flaw in disposition bias is that the performance of the investment is
often tied to the entry price for the investor. In other words, investors gauge the
performance of their investment based on their individual entry price disregarding
fundamentals or attributes of the investment that may have changed.

Familiarity Bias

The familiarity bias is when investors tend to invest in what they know, such as domestic
companies or locally owned investments. As a result, investors are not diversified across
multiple sectors and types of investments, which can reduce risk. Investors tend to go with
investments that they have a history or have familiarity with.

Familiarity bias can occur in so many ways. You may resist investing in a
specific company because of what industry it is in, where it operates, what
products it sells, who oversees the management of the company, who its
clientele base is, how it performs its marketing, and how complex its
accounting is.

Behavioral Finance in the Stock Market

The efficient market hypothesis (EMH) says that at any given time in a highly liquid
market, stock prices are efficiently valued to reflect all the available information. However,
many studies have documented long-term historical phenomena in securities markets
that contradict the efficient market hypothesis and cannot be captured plausibly in models
based on perfect investor rationality.

 

The EMH is generally based on the belief that market participants view stock prices
rationally based on all current and future intrinsic and external factors. When studying the
stock market, behavioral finance takes the view that markets are not fully efficient. This
allows for the observation of how psychological and social factors can influence the buying
and selling of stocks.

The understanding and usage of behavioral finance biases can be applied to stock and
other trading market movements on a daily basis. Broadly, behavioral finance theories
have also been used to provide clearer explanations of substantial market anomalies like
bubbles and deep recessions. While not a part of EMH, investors and portfolio managers
have a vested interest in understanding behavioral finance trends. These trends can be
used to help analyze market price levels and fluctuations for speculation as well as
decision-making purposes.

What Does Behavioral Finance Tell Us?
Behavioral finance helps us understand how financial decisions around things like
investments, payments, risk, and personal debt, are greatly influenced by human emotion,
biases, and cognitive limitations of the mind in processing and responding to information.

How Does Behavioral Finance Differ From Mainstream
Financial Theory?

Mainstream theory, on the other hand, makes the assumptions in its models that people
are rational actors, that they are free from emotion or the effects of culture and social
relations, and that people are self-interested utility maximizers. It also assumes, by
extension, that markets are efficient and firms are rational profit-maximizing organizations.
Behavioral finance counters each of these assumptions.

How Does Knowing About Behavioral Finance Help?

By understanding how and when people deviate from rational expectations, behavioral
finance provides a blueprint to help us make better, more rational decisions when it comes
to financial matters.

What Is an Example of a Finding in Behavioral Finance?

Investors are found to systematically hold on to losing investments far too long than
rational expectations would predict, and they also sell winners too early. This is known as
the disposition effect, and is an extension of the concept of loss aversion to the domain of
investing. Rather than locking in a paper loss, investors holding lose positions may even
double down and take on greater risk in hopes of breaking even.

The Bottom Line

Behavioral finance is an area of economics that fuses with psychology. It ascribes the
often irrational behavior of individuals when faced with financial choices to a variety of
biases and heuristics. Often, individuals are unaware of the underlying biases at work that
can underlie bad decision-making. A study of this area of finance is essential to anyone
who wants to master the art of trading and investing.


--- End of behavioural finance.pdf ---
--- Start of Investment.pdf ---
Investment is traditionally defined as the "commitment of resources to achieve later benefits". If an
investment involves money, then it can be defined as a "commitment of money to receive more money
later". From a broader viewpoint, an investment can be defined as "to tailor the pattern of expenditure
and receipt of resources to optimise the desirable patterns of these flows". When expenditures and
receipts are defined in terms of money, then the net monetary receipt in a time period is termed cash
flow, while money received in a series of several time periods is termed cash flow stream.

In finance, the purpose of investing is to generate a return on the invested asset. The return may
consist of a capital gain (profit) or loss, realised if the investment is sold, unrealised capital
appreciation (or depreciation) if yet unsold. It may also consist of periodic income such

as dividends, interest, or rental income. The return may also include currency gains or losses due to
changes in foreign currency exchange rates.

Investors generally expect higher returns from riskier investments. When a low-risk investment is
made, the return is also generally low. Similarly, high risk comes with a chance of high losses.
Investors, particularly novices, are often advised to diversify their portfolio. Diversification has
the statistical effect of reducing overall risk.

Types of financial investments

In modern economies, traditional investments include:

e Stocks - Business ownership, known as equity, in publicly traded companies

e Bonds - loans to governments and businesses traded on public markets

e Cash - holding a particular currency, whether in anticipation of spending or to take advantage of or
hedge against changes in a currency exchange rate

e Real estate, which can be rented to provide ongoing income or resold if it increases in value

Alternative investments include:

e Private equity in businesses that are not publicly traded on a stock exchange, often
involving venture capital funds, angel investors, or equity crowdfunding

e Other loans, including mortgages

e« Commodities, such as precious metals like gold, agricultural products like potatoes,

and energy deliveries like natural gas

Collectables, including art, coins, vintage cars, postage stamps, and wine

Carbon offsets and credits

Digital entities like cryptocurrency and non-fungible tokens

Hedge funds that use sophisticated techniques like:

e Derivatives, the value of which is determined by a contract and is derived by calculation from
the performance of some other sort of underlying investment; these
include forwards, futures, options, swaps, collateralized debt obligations, credit default swaps,
and Tax Receivable Agreements

e Leveraged investing, which is the investment of borrowed money

e Short selling, which typically uses leverage and derivatives to bet that the value of a stock will
decline

Investment and risk

An investor may bear a risk of loss of some or all of their capital invested. Investment differs
from arbitrage, in which profit is generated without investing capital or bearing risk.

Savings bear the (normally remote) risk that the financial provider may default.
Foreign currency savings also bear foreign exchange risk: if the currency of a savings account differs
from the account holder's home currency, then there is the risk that the exchange rate between the
two currencies will move unfavourably so that the value of the savings account decreases, measured
in the account holder's home currency.

Even investing in tangible assets like property has its risk. And similar to most risks, property buyers
can seek to mitigate any potential risk by taking out mortgage and by borrowing at a lower loan to
security ratio.

In contrast with savings, investments tend to carry more risk, in the form of both a wider variety of risk
factors and a greater level of uncertainty.

Industry to industry volatility is more or less of a risk depending. In biotechnology, for example,
investors look for big profits on companies that have small market capitalizations but can be worth
hundreds of millions quite quickly. |] The risk is high because approximately 90% of biotechnology
products researched do not make it to market due to regulations and the complex demands within
pharmacology as the average prescription drug takes 10 years and US$2.5 billion worth of capital. 2]

History

This section needs
expansion. You can help

- by adding to it. (October
2018)

In the medieval Islamic world, the girad was a major financial instrument. This was an arrangement
between one or more investors and an agent where the investors entrusted capital to an agent who
then traded with it in hopes of making a profit. Both parties then received a previously settled portion
of the profit, though the agent was not liable for any losses. Many will notice that the qirad is similar to
the institution of the commenda later used in western Europe, though whether the girad transformed
into the commenda or the two institutions evolved independently cannot be stated with certainty.!°!

In the early 1900s, purchasers of stocks, bonds, and other securities were described in media,
academia, and commerce as speculators. Since the Wall Street crash of 1929, and particularly by the
1950s, the term investment had come to denote the more conservative end of the securities spectrum,
while speculation was applied by financial brokers and their advertising agencies to higher risk
securities much in vogue at that time.'! Since the last half of the 20th century, the

terms speculation and speculator have specifically referred to higher risk ventures.

Investment strategies

Value investing
Main article: Value investing

A value investor buys assets that they believe to be undervalued (and sells overvalued ones). To
identify undervalued securities, a value investor uses analysis of the financial reports of the issuer to
evaluate the security. Value investors employ accounting ratios, such as earnings per share and sales
growth, to identify securities trading at prices below their worth.

Warren Buffett and Benjamin Graham are notable examples of value investors. Graham
and Dodd's seminal work, Security Analysis, was written in the wake of the Wall Street Crash of
4929,[5]

The price to earnings ratio (P/E), or earnings multiple, is a particularly significant and recognized
fundamental ratio, with a function of dividing the share price of the stock, by its earnings per share.
This will provide the value representing the sum investors are prepared to expend for each dollar of
company earnings. This ratio is an important aspect, due to its capacity as measurement for the
comparison of valuations of various companies. A stock with a lower P/E ratio will cost less per share
than one with a higher P/E, taking into account the same level of financial performance; therefore, it
essentially means a low P/E is the preferred option. ©

An instance in which the price to earnings ratio has a lesser significance is when companies in
different industries are compared. For example, although it is reasonable for a telecommunications
stock to show a P/E in the low teens, in the case of hi-tech stock, a P/E in the 40s range is not
unusual. When making comparisons, the P/E ratio can give you a refined view of a particular stock
valuation.

For investors paying for each dollar of a company's earnings, the P/E ratio is a significant indicator, but
the price-to-book ratio (P/B) is also a reliable indication of how much investors are willing to spend on
each dollar of company assets. In the process of the P/B ratio, the share price of a stock is divided by
its net assets; any intangibles, such as goodwill, are not taken into account. It is a crucial factor of the
price-to-book ratio, due to it indicating the actual payment for tangible assets and not the more difficult
valuation of intangibles. Accordingly, the P/B could be considered a comparatively conservative metric.

Growth investing

Growth investors seek investments they believe are likely to have higher earnings or greater value in
the future. To identify such stocks, growth investors often evaluate measures of current stock value as
well as predictions of future financial performance.!’! Growth investors seek profits through capital
appreciation — the gains earned when a stock is sold at a higher price than what it was purchased for.
The price-to-earnings (P/E) multiple is also used for this type of investment; growth stock are likely to
have a P/E higher than others in its industry. |°] According to Investopedia author Troy Segal and U.S.
Department of State Fulbright fintech research awardee Julius Mansa, growth investing is best suited
for investors who prefer relatively shorter investment horizons, higher risks, and are not seeking
immediate cash flow through dividends.!”]

Some investors attribute the introduction of the growth investing strategy to investment banker
Thomas Rowe Price Jr., who tested and popularized the method in 1950 by introducing his mutual
fund, the T. Rowe Price Growth Stock Fund. Price asserted that investors could reap high returns by
"investing in companies that are well-managed in fertile fields."'°!

A new form of investing that seems to have caught the attention of investors is Venture Capital.
Venture Capital is independently managed dedicated pools of capital that focus on equity or equity-
linked investments in privately held, high growth companies.!"0]

Momentum investing

Momentum investors generally seek to buy stocks that are currently experiencing a short-term
uptrend, and they usually sell them once this momentum starts to decrease. Stocks

or securities purchased for momentum investing are often characterized by demonstrating consistently
high returns for the past three to twelve months.!""] However, in a bear market, momentum investing
also involves short-selling securities of stocks that are experiencing a downward trend, because it is
believed that these stocks will continue to decrease in value. Essentially, momentum investing
generally relies on the principle that a consistently up-trending stock will continue to grow, while a
consistently down-trending stock will continue to fall.

Economists and financial analysts have not reached a consensus on the effectiveness of using the
momentum investing strategy. Rather than evaluating a company's operational performance,
momentum investors instead utilize trend lines, moving averages, and the Average Directional Index
(ADX) to determine the existence and strength of trends.!'21

Dollar cost averaging

Dollar cost averaging (DCA), also known in the UK as pound-cost
averaging, is the process of consistently investing a certain

amount of money across regular increments of time, and the aint
method can be used in conjunction with value investing, growth

investing, momentum investing, or other strategies. For example,

an investor who practices dollar-cost averaging could choose to

invest $200 a month for the next 3 years, regardless of the share

price of their preferred stock(s), mutual funds, or exchange-traded

funds. Dollar cost averaging: If an
individual invested $500 per
month into the stock market for 40
years at a 10% annual return rate,
they would have an ending
balance of over $2.5 million.

Many investors believe that dollar-cost averaging helps minimize
short-term volatility by spreading risk out across time intervals and
avoiding market timing.!12) Research also shows that DCA can
help reduce the total average cost per share in an investment
because the method enables the purchase of more shares when
their price is lower, and less shares when the price is

higher.!"2] However, dollar-cost averaging is also generally
characterized by more brokerage fees, which could decrease an investor's overall returns.

The term "dollar-cost averaging" is believed to have first been coined in 1949 by economist and author
Benjamin Graham in his book, The Intelligent Investor. Graham asserted that investors that use DCA
are "likely to end up with a satisfactory overall price for all [their] holdings."!'9]

Micro-investing

Micro-investing is a type of investment strategy that is designed to make investing regular, accessible
and affordable, especially for those who may not have a lot of money to invest or who are new to
investing.!141115]

Intermediaries and collective investments

Investments are often made indirectly through intermediary financial institutions. These intermediaries
include pension funds, banks, and insurance companies. They may pool money received from a
number of individual end investors into funds such as investment trusts, unit trusts, and SICAVs to
make large-scale investments. Each individual investor holds an indirect or direct claim on the assets
purchased, subject to charges levied by the intermediary, which may be large and varied.

Approaches to investment sometimes referred to in marketing of collective investments include dollar
cost averaging and market timing.
Investment valuation

Further information: Valuation (finance) and Business valuation
See also: Valuation using discounted cash flows and Valuation using multiples

Free cash flow measures the cash a company generates which is available to its debt and equity
investors, after allowing for reinvestment in working capital and capital expenditure. High and rising
free cash flow, therefore, tend to make a company more attractive to investors.

The debt-to-equity ratio is an indicator of capital structure. A high proportion of debt, reflected in a high
debt-to-equity ratio, tends to make a company's earnings, free cash flow, and ultimately the returns to
its investors, riskier or volatile. Investors compare a company's debt-to-equity ratio with those of other
companies in the same industry, and examine trends in debt-to-equity ratios and free cashflow.


--- End of Investment.pdf ---
--- Start of banks.pdf ---
A bank is a financial institution that accepts deposits from the public and creates a demand deposit while simultaneously
making loans.!"! Lending activities can be directly performed by the bank or indirectly through capital markets. |!

Whereas banks play an important role in financial stability and the economy of a country, most jurisdictions exercise a high degree
of regulation over banks. Most countries have institutionalized a system known as fractional-reserve banking, under which banks
hold liquid assets equal to only a portion of their current liabilities.!°! In addition to other regulations intended to ensure liquidity,
banks are generally subject to minimum capital requirements based on an international set of capital standards, the Basel
Accords.

Banking in its modern sense evolved in the fourteenth century in the prosperous cities of Renaissance Italy but, in many ways,
functioned as a continuation of ideas and concepts of credit and lending that had their roots in the ancient world. In the history of
banking, a number of banking dynasties — notably, the Medicis, the Pazzi, the Fuggers, the Welsers, the Berenbergs, and

the Rothschilds — have played a central role over many centuries. The oldest existing retail bank is Banca Monte dei Paschi di
Siena (founded in 1472), while the oldest existing merchant bank is Berenberg Bank (founded in 1590).

History [edit]

This section needs
expansion with: history after
“4 the 19th century. You can
help by adding to it. (August
2020)
Main article: History of banking

Banking as an archaic activity (or quasi-banking!*!!®) is thought to have begun as early as the
end of the 4th millennium BCE,!”! to the 3rd millennia BCE_I[°]

Medieval { ccit]

The present era of banking can be traced to medieval and early Renaissance Italy, to the rich
cities in the centre and north like Florence, Lucca, Siena, Venice and Genoa.

The Bardi and Peruzzi families dominated banking in 14th-century Florence, establishing
branches in many other parts of Europe.!'°! Giovanni di Bicci de' Medici set up one of the most
famous Italian banks, the Medici Bank, in 1397.!""] The Republic of Genoa founded the earliest-
known state deposit bank, and Banco di San Giorgio (Bank of St. George), in 1407 at Genoa,
Italy.

  
   

 

Early modern [edit] :
This 15th-century painting depicts
Fractional reserve banking and the issue of banknotes emerged in the 17th and 18th centuries. money-dealers at a banca (bench)
Merchants started to store their gold with the goldsmiths of London, who possessed

private vaults, and who charged a fee for that service. In exchange for each deposit of precious
metal, the goldsmiths issued receipts certifying the quantity and purity of the metal they held as
a bailee; these receipts could not be assigned, only the original depositor could collect the
stored goods.

during the Cleansing of the
Temple.

Gradually the goldsmiths began to lend money out on behalf of the depositor, and promissory
notes, which evolved into banknotes, were issued for money deposited as a loan to the
goldsmith. Thus, by the 19th century, we find in ordinary cases of deposits, of money with
banking corporations, or bankers, the transaction amounts to a mere loan, or mutuum, and the
bank is to restore, not the same money, but an equivalent sum, whenever it is
demanded!"*] and money, when paid into a bank, ceases altogether to be the money of the
principal (see Parker v. Marchant, 1 Phillips 360); it is then the money of the banker, who is
bound to return an equivalent, by paying a similar sum to that deposited with him, when he is =
asked for it. !'“I The goldsmith paid interest on deposits. Since the promissory notes were Sealing of the Bank of
payable on demand, and the advances (loans) to the goldsmith's customers were repayable Enaland Ch

; : A - : i glani arter (1694), by Lady
over a longer time-period, this was an early form of fractional reserve banking. The promissory .
notes developed into an assignable instrument which could circulate as a safe and convenient Jane Lindsay, 1905.
form of money!"®! backed by the goldsmith's promise to pay,!"®llneed quotation to veri) allowing
goldsmiths to advance loans with little risk of default,!"7llveed quotation to verify] Thys the goldsmiths of London became the
forerunners of banking by creating new money based on credit.

The Bank of England originated the permanent issue of banknotes in 1695.|'8] The Royal Bank of Scotland established the
first overdraft facility in 1728.!"°] By the beginning of the 19th century Lubbock's Bank had established a bankers’ clearing house in
London to allow multiple banks to clear transactions. The Rothschilds pioneered international
finance on a large scale,!7°ll2"] financing the purchase of shares in the Suez canal for the British
government in 1875, |22lIneed quotation to verify]

Etymolo SY edit]

 

The word bank was taken into Middle English from Middle French banque, from

Old Italian banco, meaning "table", from Old High German banc, bank "bench, counter".
Benches were used as makeshift desks or exchange counters during Interior of the Helsinki Branch of
the Renaissance by Florentine bankers, who used to make their transactions atop desks _.

covered by green tablecloths. |2°1l24] the Vyborg-Bank ffl in the 1910s

   

Definition [eait;

 

The definition of a bank varies from country to country. See the relevant country pages for more information.

Under English common law, a banker is defined as a person who carries on the business of banking by conducting current
[25]

accounts for their customers, paying cheques drawn on them and also collecting cheques for their customers.

In most common law jurisdictions there is a Bills of Exchange Act that codifies the law in relation
to negotiable instruments, including cheques, and this Act contains a statutory definition of the
term banker. banker includes a body of persons, whether incorporated or not, who carry on the
business of banking’ (Section 2, Interpretation). Although this definition seems circular, it is
actually functional, because it ensures that the legal basis for bank transactions such as
cheques does not depend on how the bank is structured or regulated.

  
   

 

The business of banking is in many common law countries not defined by statute but by Sle —_—
common law, the definition above. In other English common law jurisdictions there are statutory Banco de Venezuela in Coro.
definitions of the business of banking or banking business. When looking at these definitions it
is important to keep in mind that they are defining the business of banking for the purposes of
the legislation, and not necessarily in general. In particular, most of the definitions are from
legislation that has the purpose of regulating and supervising banks rather than regulating the
actual business of banking. However, in many cases, the statutory definition closely mirrors the
common law one. Examples of statutory definitions:

¢ "banking business" means the business of receiving money on current or deposit account,
paying and collecting cheques drawn by or paid in by customers, the making of advances to
customers, and includes such other business as the Authority may prescribe for the
purposes of this Act; (Banking Act (Singapore), Section 2, Interpretation).
e "banking business" means the business of either or both of the following: a 2
1. receiving from the general public money on current, deposit, savings or other similar Branch of Nepal Bank in Pokhara,
account repayable on demand or within less than [3 months] ... or with a period of call or Western Nepal.
notice of less than that period;
2. paying or collecting cheques drawn by or paid in by customers.

Since the advent of EFTPOS (Electronic Funds Transfer at Point Of Sale), direct credit, direct debit and internet banking, the
cheque has lost its primacy in most banking systems as a payment instrument. This has led legal theorists to suggest that the
cheque based definition should be broadened to include financial institutions that conduct current accounts for customers and
enable customers to pay and be paid by third parties, even if they do not pay and collect cheques 27

[26]

Standard business [cit]

Banks act as payment agents by conducting checking or current accounts for customers,
paying cheques drawn by customers in the bank, and collecting cheques deposited to
customers' current accounts. Banks also enable customer payments via other payment
methods such as Automated Clearing House (ACH), Wire transfers or telegraphic
transfer, EFTPOS, and automated teller machines (ATMs).

Banks borrow money by accepting funds deposited on current accounts, by accepting term
deposits, and by issuing debt securities such as banknotes and bonds. Banks lend money by
making advances to customers on current accounts, by making installment loans, and by
investing in marketable debt securities and other forms of money lending.

 

Large door to an old bank vault.

Banks provide different payment services, and a bank account is considered indispensable by
most businesses and individuals. Non-banks that provide payment services such as remittance companies are normally not
considered as an adequate substitute for a bank account.
Banks issue new money when they make loans. In contemporary banking systems, regulators set a minimum level of reserve funds
that banks must hold against the deposit liabilities created by the funding of these loans, in order to ensure that the banks can meet
demands for payment of such deposits. These reserves can be acquired through the acceptance of new deposits, sale of other
assets, or borrowing from other banks including the central bank.|28

Range of activities [edit]

Activities undertaken by banks include personal banking, corporate banking, investment banking, private banking, transaction
banking, insurance, consumer finance, trade finance and other related.

Channels [edit]

Banks offer many different channels to access their banking and other services:

e Branch, in-person banking in a retail location
e Automated teller machine banking adjacent to or remote from the bank
e Bank by mail: Most banks accept cheque deposits via mail and use mail to communicate to
their customers
e Online banking over the Internet to perform multiple types of transactions
e Mobile banking is using one's mobile phone to conduct banking transactions
e Telephone banking allows customers to conduct transactions over the telephone with
an automated attendant, or when requested, with a telephone operator I
e Video banking performs banking transactions or professional banking consultations via a An American bank in Maryland.
remote video and audio connection. Video banking can be performed via purpose built
banking transaction machines (similar to an Automated teller machine) or via a video
conference enabled bank branch clarification
e Relationship manager, mostly for private banking or business banking, who visits customers at their homes or businesses
e Direct Selling Agent, who works for the bank based on a contract, whose main job is to increase the customer base for the bank

 

Business models [edit]

A bank can generate revenue in a variety of different ways including interest, transaction fees and financial advice. Traditionally, the
most significant method is via charging interest on the capital it lends out to customers.!7°! The bank profits from the difference
between the level of interest it pays for deposits and other sources of funds, and the level of interest it charges in its lending
activities.

This difference is referred to as the spread between the cost of funds and the loan interest rate. Historically, profitability from
lending activities has been cyclical and dependent on the needs and strengths of loan customers and the stage of the economic
cycle. Fees and financial advice constitute a more stable revenue stream and banks have therefore placed more emphasis on
these revenue lines to smooth their financial performance.

In the past 20 years, American banks have taken many measures to ensure that they remain profitable while responding to
increasingly changing market conditions.

e First, this includes the Gramm—Leach-Bliley Act, which allows banks again to merge with investment and insurance houses.
Merging banking, investment, and insurance functions allows traditional banks to respond to increasing consumer demands for
“one-stop shopping" by enabling cross-selling of products (which, the banks hope, will also increase profitability).

¢ Second, they have expanded the use of risk-based pricing from business lending to consumer lending, which means charging
higher interest rates to those customers that are considered to be a higher credit risk and thus increased chance of default on
loans. This helps to offset the losses from bad loans, lowers the price of loans to those who have better credit histories, and
offers credit products to high risk customers who would otherwise be denied credit.

e Third, they have sought to increase the methods of payment processing available to the general public and business clients.
These products include debit cards, prepaid cards, smart cards, and credit cards. They make it easier for consumers to
conveniently make transactions and smooth their consumption over time (in some countries with underdeveloped financial
systems, it is still common to deal strictly in cash, including carrying suitcases filled with cash to purchase a home).

However, with the convenience of easy credit, there is also an increased risk that consumers will mismanage their financial
resources and accumulate excessive debt. Banks make money from card products through interest charges and fees charged
to credit and debit card holders, and transaction fees to retailers°°! who accept the bank's cards for payments.

This helps in making a profit and facilitates economic development as a whole.!°1]

Recently, as banks have been faced with pressure from fintechs, new and additional business models have been suggested such
as freemium, monetisation of data, white-labeling of banking and payment applications, or the cross-selling of complementary
products. |°2]

Products [edit]
Retail [edit]

e ATM card

¢ Credit card

¢ Debit card

e Savings account

e Recurring deposit account

e Fixed deposit account

e¢ Money market account

* Certificate of deposit (CD)

¢ Individual retirement account (IRA)

e Mortgage

e Mutual fund

e Personal loan (Secured and Unsecured Personal loan)
¢ Time deposits

¢ Current accounts

e Cheque books

¢ Automated teller machine (ATM)

e National Electronic Fund Transfer (NEFT)
e Real-time gross settlement (RTGS)

Business (or commercial/investment) banking [ ecit |

¢ Business loan
¢ Capital raising (equity / debt / hybrids)
e Revolving credit

e Risk management (foreign exchange (FX), interest rates, commodities, derivatives)

¢ Term loan

 

A former building society, now a
modern retail bank in Leeds, West
Yorkshire.

 

An interior of a branch of National
Westminster Bank on Castle
Street, Liverpool

e Cash management services (lock box, remote deposit capture, merchant processing)

¢ Credit services
* Securities Services

Capital and risk {ecit;

 

Further information: Financial risk management § Banking
See also: Finance § Risk management, Investment banking § Risk
management, and Treasury management § Banks

Banks face a number of risks in order to conduct their business, and how
well these risks are managed and understood is a key driver behind
profitability, and how much capital a bank is required to hold. Bank capital
consists principally of equity, retained earnings and subordinated debt.

Some of the main risks faced by banks include:

e Credit risk: risk of loss arising from a borrower who does not make
payments as promised.!°31

e Liquidity risk: risk that a given security or asset cannot be traded quickly
enough in the market to prevent a loss (or make the required profit).

e Market risk: risk that the value of a portfolio, either an investment
portfolio or a trading portfolio, will decrease due to the change in value of
the market risk factors.

e Operational risk: risk arising from the execution of a company's business
functions.

e Reputational risk: a type of risk related to the trustworthiness of the
business.

e Macroeconomic risk: risks related to the aggregate economy the bank is
operating in./°4]

The capital requirement is a bank regulation, which sets a framework within
which a bank or depository institution must manage its balance sheet. The

categorisation of assets and capital is highly standardised so that it can
be risk weighted.

After the financial crisis of 2007—2008, regulators force banks to

 

 

Specific banking frameworks
Market risk
FRTB
Internal models approach (IMA)
Standardized approach (market risk)
Credit risk

Internal ratings-based approach (IRB)
Foundation IRB (F-IRB)

Advanced IRB (A-IRB)

Standardized approach (credit risk)

Counterparty credit risk

Current exposure method (CEM)
Standardised method (SM)
Standardized approach (counterparty credit risk) (SA-
CCR)

Operational risk
Advanced measurement approach (AMA)
Basic indicator approach
Standardized approach (operational risk)
Standardised measurement approach (SMA)

VTE

 

 

issue Contingent convertible bonds (CoCos). These are hybrid capital securities that absorb losses in accordance with their
contractual terms when the capital of the issuing bank falls below a certain level. Then debt is reduced and bank capitalisation gets

a boost. Owing to their capacity to absorb losses, CoCos have the potential to satisfy regulatory capital requirement. 251861
Banks in the economy edit)

See also: Financial system

Economic functions [edit]

The economic functions of banks include:
1.

. Netting and settlement of payments — banks act as both collection and paying agents for

Issue of money, in the form of banknotes and current accounts subject to cheque or
payment at the customer's order. These claims on banks can act as money because
they are negotiable or repayable on demand, and hence valued at par. They are
effectively transferable by mere delivery, in the case of banknotes, or by drawing a
cheque that the payee may bank or cash.

customers, participating in interbank clearing and settlement systems to collect, present,
be presented with, and pay payment instruments. This enables banks to economise on
reserves held for settlement of payments since inward and outward payments offset
each other. It also enables the offsetting of payment flows between geographical areas,
reducing the cost of settlement between them.

 

. Credit quality improvement — banks lend money to ordinary commercial and personal SEB main building

borrowers (ordinary credit quality), but are high quality borrowers. The improvement
comes from diversification of the bank's assets and capital which provides a buffer to
absorb losses without defaulting on its obligations. However, banknotes and deposits are
generally unsecured; if the bank gets into difficulty and pledges assets as security, to
raise the funding it needs to continue to operate, this puts the note holders and depositors in an economically subordinated
position.

in Tallinn, Estonia

. Asset liability mismatch/Maturity transformation — banks borrow more on demand debt and short term debt, but provide

more long-term loans. In other words, they borrow short and lend long. With a stronger credit quality than most other
borrowers, banks can do this by aggregating issues (e.g. accepting deposits and issuing banknotes) and redemptions (e.g.
withdrawals and redemption of banknotes), maintaining reserves of cash, investing in marketable securities that can be
readily converted to cash if needed, and raising replacement funding as needed from various sources (e.g. wholesale cash
markets and securities markets).

. Money creation/destruction — whenever a bank gives out a loan in a fractional-reserve banking system, a new sum of money

is created and conversely, whenever the principal on that loan is repaid money is destroyed.

Bank crisis [ecit)

Banks are susceptible to many forms of risk which have triggered occasional systemic crises.!°”) These
include liquidity risk (where many depositors may request withdrawals in excess of available funds), credit

risk (the chance that those who owe money to the bank will not repay it), and interest rate risk (the possibility
that the bank will become unprofitable, if rising interest rates force it to pay relatively more on its deposits than
it receives on its loans).

Banking crises have developed many times throughout history when one or more risks have emerged for the

banking sector as a whole. Prominent examples include the bank run that occurred during the Great
Depression, the U.S. Savings and Loan crisis in the 1980s and early 1990s, the Japanese banking crisis
during the 1990s, and the sub-prime mortgage crisis in the 2000s.

 

OTP Bank
The 2023 global banking crisis is the latest of these crises: In March 2023, liquidity shortages and bank in PreSov (Slovaki
insolvencies led to three bank failures in the United States, and within two weeks, several of the world's a)

largest banks failed or were shut down by regulators

Size of global banking industry [cit]

Assets of the largest 1,000 banks in the world grew by 6.8% in the 2008-2009 financial year to a record US$96.4 trillion while
profits declined by 85% to US$115 billion. Growth in assets in adverse market conditions was largely a result of recapitalisation. EU
banks held the largest share of the total, 56% in 2008-2009, down from 61% in the previous year. Asian banks’ share increased
from 12% to 14% during the year, while the share of US banks increased from 11% to 13%. Fee revenue generated by global

investment in banking totalled US$66.3 billion in 2009, up 12% on the previous year."

38]

The United States has the most banks in the world in terms of institutions (5,330 as of 2015) and possibly branches (81,607 as of
2015)./99] This is an indicator of the geography and regulatory structure of the US, resulting in a large number of small to medium-
sized institutions in its banking system. As of November 2009, China's top four banks have in excess of 67,000 branches
(ICBC:18000+, BOC:12000+, CCB:13000+, ABC:24000+) with an additional 140 smaller banks with an undetermined number of
branches. Japan had 129 banks and 12,000 branches. In 2004, Germany, France, and Italy each had more than 30,000
branches — more than double the 15,000 branches in the United Kingdom. !°*
Mergers and acquisitions [edit]

Between 1985 and 2018 banks engaged in around 28,798 mergers or acquisitions, either as the acquirer or the target company.
The overall known value of these deals cumulates to around 5,169 bil. USD.'*°! In terms of value, there have been two major
waves (1999 and 2007) which both peaked at around 460 bil. USD followed by a steep decline (-82% from 2007 until 2018).

Here is a list of the largest deals in history in terms of value with participation from at least one bank:

Acquiring institution Target institution Value of
Date ~ Tolarificati a ,
announced Name midllerification needed] Nation Name Mid Nation transaction
industry industry ($ millions)
RFS - . ABN-AMRO Holding
2007-04-25 Holdings BV Other financials Netherlands NV. Banks Netherlands | 98,189.19
Travelers United we United
1998-04-06 Group Inc Insurance States Citicorp Banks States 72,558.18
2014-09-29 | UBS AG Banks Switzerland Aleleication needed} | Banks Switzerland | 65,891.51
NationsBank
Corp, United United
1998-04-13 | Charlotte, Banks s BankAmerica Corp Banks 61,633.40
North tates States
Carolina
JPMorgan United Bank One Corp, United
2004-01-14 | Chase &Co | Banks States Chicago, Illinois Banks States 58,663.15
Bank of United FleetBoston Financial United
2003-10-27 | america Corp Banks States Corp, Massachusetts Banks States 49,260.63
Bank of United Merrill Lynch & Co United
2008-09-14 America Corp Banks States Inc Brokerage States 48,766.15
Sumitomo
1999-10-13 Bank Ltd Banks Japan Sakura Bank Ltd Banks Japan 45,494.36
. United Royal Bank of United
2009-02-26 | HM Treasury | National agency Kingdom Scotland Group Banks Kingdom 41,878.65
Mitsubishi
2005-02-18 Tokyo . Banks Japan UFJ Holdings Inc Banks Japan 41,431.03
Financial
Group

Regulation [ecit]
Main article: Banking regulation
See also: Basel ||

Currently, commercial banks are regulated in most jurisdictions by government entities and require a special bank license to
operate.

Basel Framework
International regulatory standards for banks
»mmittee on Banking SupervisionBasel Accords Basel |Basel I|Basel III LCRNSFRFRTBEndgame
Background
Banking / RegulationMonetary policy / Central bankRisk / Risk management

Pillar 1: Regulatory capital

‘edit risk SA-CRIRB F-IRBA-IRBEAD SA-CCRIMMCCF Market risk StandardizedIMACVA vol BA-CVASA-CVAOperational risk BasicStandardizedAMA
Pillar 2: Supervisory review

Economic capitalLiquidity riskLegal risk

Pillar 3: Market disclosure

Disclosure

Business and Economics Portal
VTE

 

Usually, the definition of the business of banking for the purposes of regulation is extended to include acceptance of deposits, even
if they are not repayable to the customer's order — although money lending, by itself, is generally not included in the definition.

Unlike most other regulated industries, the regulator is typically also a participant in the market, being either publicly or privately
governed central bank. Central banks also typically have a monopoly on the business of issuing banknotes. However, in some
countries, this is not the case. In the UK, for example, the Financial Services Authority licenses banks, and some commercial banks
(such as the Bank of Scotland) issue their own banknotes in addition to those issued by the Bank of England, the UK government's
central bank.

Banking law is based on a contractual analysis of the relationship between the bank (defined
above) and the customer — defined as any entity for which the bank agrees to conduct an
account.

The law implies rights and obligations into this relationship as follows:

e The bank account balance is the financial position between the bank and the customer:
when the account is in credit, the bank owes the balance to the customer; when the account
is overdrawn, the customer owes the balance to the bank.

e The bank agrees to pay the customer's checks up to the amount standing to the credit of the
customer's account, plus any agreed overdraft limit.

e The bank may not pay from the customer's account without a mandate from the customer,
e.g. a cheque drawn by the customer.

e The bank agrees to promptly collect the cheques deposited to the customer's account as the
customer's agent and to credit the proceeds to the customer's account.

e And, the bank has a right to combine the customer's accounts since each account is just an Global headquarters of the Bank
aspect of the same credit relationship. for International

e The bank has a lien on cheques deposited to the customer's account, to the extent that the
customer is indebted to the bank.

¢ The bank must not disclose details of transactions through the customer's account — unless
the customer consents, there is a public duty to disclose, the bank's interests require it, or the law demands it.

e The bank must not close a customer's account without reasonable notice, since cheques are outstanding in the ordinary course
of business for several days.

 

Settlements in Basel

These implied contractual terms may be modified by express agreement between the customer and the bank. The statutes and
regulations in force within a particular jurisdiction may also modify the above terms or create new rights, obligations, or limitations
relevant to the bank-customer relationship.

Some types of financial institutions, such as building societies and credit unions, may be partly or wholly exempt from bank license
requirements, and therefore regulated under separate rules.
The requirements for the issue of a bank license vary between jurisdictions but typically include:

e Minimum capital

e Minimum capital ratio

e 'Fit and Proper' requirements for the bank's controllers, owners, directors, or senior officers
e Approval of the bank's business plan as being sufficiently prudent and plausible.

Different types of banking [e:it)

Banks’ activities can be divided into:

 

e retail banking, dealing directly with individuals and small businesses;

e business banking, providing services to mid-market business;

¢ corporate banking, directed at large business entities;

¢ private banking, providing wealth management services to high-net-worth individuals and
families;

e investment banking, relating to activities on the financial markets.

Most banks are profit-making, private enterprises. However, some are owned by the
government, or are non-profit organisations.

 

An illustration of Northern National

Bank as advertised in a 1921
Types of banks [edit] book highlighting the opportunities

¢ Commercial banks: the term used for a normal bank to distinguish it from an investment available in Toledo, Ohio
bank. After the Great Depression, the U.S. Congress required that banks only engage in
banking activities, whereas investment banks were limited to capital market activities. Since
the two no longer have to be under separate ownership, some use the term "commercial bank" to refer to a bank or a division of
a bank that mostly deals with deposits and loans from corporations or large businesses.
e¢ Community banks: locally operated financial institutions that empower employees to make
local decisions to serve their customers and partners.

e Community development banks: regulated banks that provide financial services and credit to
under-served markets or populations.

e Land development banks: The special banks providing long-term loans are called land
development banks (LDB). The history of LDB is quite old. The first LDB was started at
Jhang in Punjab in 1920. The main objective of the LDBs is to promote the development of
land, agriculture and increase the agricultural production. The LDBs provide long-term
finance to members directly through their branches. |41]

e Credit unions or co-operative banks: not-for-profit cooperatives owned by the depositors and
often offering rates more favourable than for-profit banks. Typically, membership is restricted
to employees of a particular company, residents of a defined area, members of a
certain union or religious organisations, and their immediate families.

e Postal savings banks: savings banks associated with national postal systems.

e Private banks: banks that manage the assets of high-net-worth individuals. Historically a
minimum of US$1 million was required to open an account, however, over the last years,
many private banks have lowered their entry hurdles to US$350,000 for private investors.!42

e Offshore banks: banks located in jurisdictions with low taxation and regulation. Many
offshore banks are essentially private banks.

e Savings banks: in Europe, savings banks took their roots in the 19th or sometimes even in
the 18th century. Their original objective was to provide easily accessible savings products
to all strata of the population. In some countries, savings banks were created on public
initiative; in others, socially committed individuals created foundations to put in place the
necessary infrastructure. Nowadays, European savings banks have kept their focus on retail
banking: payments, savings products, credits, and insurances for individuals or small and
medium-sized enterprises. Apart from this retail focus, they also differ from commercial
banks by their broadly decentralised distribution network, providing local and regional
outreach — and by their socially responsible approach to business and society.

e Ethical banks: banks that prioritize the transparency of all operations and make only what
they consider to be socially responsible investments.

¢ Adirect or internet-only bank is a banking operation without any physical bank branches.
Transactions are usually accomplished using ATMs and electronic transfers and direct
deposits through an online interface.

Types of investment banks [ecit)

e Investment banks "underwrite" (guarantee the sale of) stock and bond issues,
provide investment management, and advise corporations on capital market activities such
as M&A, trade for their own accounts, make markets, provide securities services to
institutional clients.

e Merchant banks were traditionally banks which engaged in trade finance. The modern
definition, however, refers to banks which provide capital to firms in the form of shares rather
than loans. Unlike venture caps, they tend not to invest in new companies.

Combination banks [edit]

e Universal banks, more commonly known as financial services companies, engage in several
of these activities. These big banks are very diversified groups that, among other services,
also distribute insurance — hence the term bancassurance, a portmanteau word combining
“banque or bank" and "assurance", signifying that both banking and insurance are provided
by the same corporate entity.

Other types of banks [eit]

e Central banks are normally government-owned and charged with quasi-regulatory
responsibilities, such as supervising commercial banks, or controlling the cash interest rate.
They generally provide liquidity to the banking system and act as the lender of last resort in
event of a crisis.

e Islamic banks adhere to the concepts of Islamic law. This form of banking revolves around
several well-established principles based on Islamic laws. All banking activities must avoid
interest, a concept that is forbidden in Islam. Instead, the bank earns profit (markup) and
fees on the financing facilities that it extends to customers.

Challenges within the banking industry {cai

The examples and perspective in this section may not represent
a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this section,
discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new section, as

   

a
fb 5

National Bank of the
Republic, Salt Lake City 1908

 

 

An office of Nordea bank
in Mariehamn, Aland

F

 

 
appropriate. (September 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this National Copper Bank, Salt Lake
message) City 1911

This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this

CS section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material
may be challenged and removed. (September 2008) (Learn how and
when to remove this message)

United States [edit]
Main article: Banking in the United States

The United States banking industry is one of the most heavily regulated and guarded in the
world,'4%] with multiple specialised and focused regulators. All banks with FDIC-insured deposits
have the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) as a regulator. However, for soundness
examinations (i.e., whether a bank is operating in a sound manner), the Federal Reserve is the
primary federal regulator for Fed-member state banks; the Office of the Comptroller of the
Currency (OCC) is the primary federal regulator for national banks. State non-member banks
are examined by the state agencies as well as the FDIC, |441:238 National banks have one
primary regulator — the OCC.

   

Each regulatory agency has its own set of rules and regulations to which banks and thrifts must
adhere. The Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC) was established in
1979 as a formal inter-agency body empowered to prescribe uniform principles, standards, and
report forms for the federal examination of financial institutions. Although the FFIEC has ° . °
resulted in a greater degree of regulatory consistency between the agencies, the rules and Brazil and Latin America.
regulations are constantly changing.

A Banco do Brasil office in Sao
Paulo, Brazil, the bank is the
largest financial institution in

In addition to changing regulations, changes in the industry have led to consolidations within the
Federal Reserve, FDIC, OTS, and OCC. Offices have been closed, supervisory regions have been
merged, staff levels have been reduced and budgets have been cut. The remaining regulators face
an increased burden with an increased workload and more banks per regulator. While banks struggle
to keep up with the changes in the regulatory environment, regulators struggle to manage their
workload and effectively regulate their banks. The impact of these changes is that banks are
receiving less hands-on assessment by the regulators, less time spent with each institution, and the
potential for more problems slipping through the cracks, potentially resulting in an overall increase in
bank failures across the United States.

The changing economic environment has a significant impact on banks and thrifts as they struggle to
effectively manage their interest rate spread in the face of low rates on loans, rate competition for

 

deposits and the general market changes, industry trends and economic fluctuations. It has been a Citibank, The People's
challenge for banks to effectively set their growth strategies with the recent economic market. A rising Trust Company
interest rate environment may seem to help financial institutions, but the effect of the changes on Building, Brooklyn, New
consumers and businesses is not predictable and the challenge remains for banks to grow and York City.

effectively manage the spread to generate a return to their shareholders.

The management of the banks' asset portfolios also remains a challenge in today's economic environment. Loans are a bank's
primary asset category and when loan quality becomes suspect, the foundation of a bank is shaken to the core. While always an
issue for banks, declining asset quality has become a big problem for financial institutions.

There are several reasons for this, one of which is the lax attitude some banks have adopted
because of the years of "good times." The potential for this is exacerbated by the reduction in the
regulatory oversight of banks and in some cases depth of management. Problems are more likely
to go undetected, resulting in a significant impact on the bank when they are discovered. In
addition, banks, like any business, struggle to cut costs and have consequently eliminated certain
expenses, such as adequate employee training programs.

Banks also face a host of other challenges such as ageing ownership groups. Across the country,
many banks' management teams and boards of directors are ageing. Banks also face ongoing
pressure from shareholders, both public and private, to achieve earnings and growth projections.
Regulators place added pressure on banks to manage the various categories of risk. Banking is
also an extremely competitive industry. Competing in the financial services industry has become
tougher with the entrance of such players as insurance agencies, credit unions, cheque cashing
services, credit card companies, etc.

As a reaction, banks have developed their activities in financial instruments, through financial
market operations such as brokerage and have become big players in such activities.

 

Another major challenge is the ageing infrastructure, also called legacy IT. Backend systems were Safra National Bank, New York
built decades ago and are incompatible with new applications. Fixing bugs and creating interfaces
costs huge sums, as knowledgeable programmers become scarce. |*5l

Loan activities of banks [cit]

To be able to provide home buyers and builders with the funds needed, banks must compete for deposits. The phenomenon

of disintermediation had to dollars moving from savings accounts and into direct market instruments such as U.S. Department of
Treasury obligations, agency securities, and corporate debt. One of the greatest factors in recent years in the movement of
deposits was the tremendous growth of money market funds whose higher interest rates attracted consumer deposits. '*°

To compete for deposits, US savings institutions offer many different types of plans:!46!

e Passbook or ordinary deposit accounts — permit any amount to be added to or withdrawn from the account at any time.

e NOW and Super NOW accounts — function like checking accounts but earn interest. A minimum balance may be required on
Super NOW accounts.

e Money market accounts — carry a monthly limit of preauthorised transfers to other accounts or persons and may require a
minimum or average balance.

¢ Certificate accounts — subject to loss of some or all interest on withdrawals before maturity.

e Notice accounts — the equivalent of certificate accounts with an indefinite term. Savers agree to notify the institution a specified
time before withdrawal.

¢ Individual retirement accounts (IRAs) and Keogh plans — a form of retirement savings in which the funds deposited and interest
earned are exempt from income tax until after withdrawal.

e Checking accounts — offered by some institutions under definite restrictions.

e All withdrawals and deposits are completely the sole decision and responsibility of the account owner unless the parent or
guardian is required to do otherwise for legal reasons.

e Club accounts and other savings accounts — designed to help people save regularly to meet certain goals.

Types of accounts [edit]

Bank statements are accounting records produced by banks under the various accounting
standards of the world. Under GAAP there are two kinds of accounts: debit and credit. Credit
accounts are Revenue, Equity and Liabilities. Debit Accounts are Assets and Expenses. The
bank credits a credit account to increase its balance, and debits a credit account to decrease its
balance./47]

The customer debits his or her savings/bank (asset) in his ledger when making a deposit (and
the account is normally in debit), while the customer credits a credit card (liability) account in his
ledger every time he spends money (and the account is normally in credit). When the customer Suburban bank branch

reads his bank statement, the statement will show a credit to the account for deposits, and

debits for withdrawals of funds. The customer with a positive balance will see this balance

reflected as a credit balance on the bank statement. If the customer is overdrawn, he will have a negative balance, reflected as a
debit balance on the bank statement.

 

Brokered deposits [cdi]

One source of deposits for banks is deposit brokers who deposit large sums of money on behalf of investors through trust
corporations. This money will generally go to the banks which offer the most favourable terms, often better than those offered local
depositors. It is possible for a bank to engage in business with no local deposits at all, all funds being brokered deposits.
Accepting a significant quantity of such deposits, or "hot money" as it is sometimes called, puts a bank in a difficult and sometimes
risky position, as the funds must be lent or invested in a way that yields a return sufficient to pay the high interest being paid on the
brokered deposits. This may result in risky decisions and even in eventual failure of the bank. Banks which failed during 2008 and
2009 in the United States during the global financial crisis had, on average, four times more brokered deposits as a percent of their
deposits than the average bank. Such deposits, combined with risky real estate investments, factored into the savings and loan
crisis of the 1980s. Regulation of brokered deposits is opposed by banks on the grounds that the practice can be a source of
external funding to growing communities with insufficient local deposits. 48] There are different types of accounts: saving, recurring
and current accounts.

Custodial accounts [ceait]

Custodial accounts are accounts in which assets are held for a third party. For example, businesses that accept custody of funds
for clients prior to their conversion, return, or transfer may have a custodial account at a bank for these purposes.
Globalisation in the banking industry {ecit;

In modern times there have been huge reductions to the barriers of global competition in the banking industry. Increases in
telecommunications and other financial technologies, such as Bloomberg, have allowed banks to extend their reach all over the
world since they no longer have to be near customers to manage both their finances and their risk. The growth in cross-border
activities has also increased the demand for banks that can provide various services across borders to different nationalities.
Despite these reductions in barriers and growth in cross-border activities, the banking industry is nowhere near as globalised as
some other industries. In the US, for instance, very few banks even worry about the Riegle—Neal Act, which promotes more efficient
interstate banking. In the vast majority of nations around the globe, the market share for foreign owned banks is currently less than
a tenth of all market shares for banks in a particular nation. One reason the banking industry has not been fully globalised is that it
is more convenient to have local banks provide loans to small businesses and individuals. On the other hand, for large

corporations, it is not as important in what nation the bank is in since the corporation's financial information is available around the
globe


--- End of banks.pdf ---
--- Start of financial fraud.pdf ---
what is financial fraud? How does it play a pivotal role in the financial crime compliance landscape?

Financial fraud embodies a spectrum of deceptive tactics aimed at illegally acquiring financial resources or assets. This can be
accomplished through various fraudulent schemes such as identity theft, accounting fraud, embezzlement, and cybercrimes.

Financial fraud manipulates or misrepresents financial data, leading to financial losses. This can be for individuals,
corporations, or even nations. Within the framework of financial crime compliance, grasping the multifaceted nature of
financial fraud is fundamental in devising effective prevention and detection strategies.

First, let’s see a recent example.

A Real Example of Financial Fraud

Financial fraud that has impacted the banking sector is the Ecuador Bank Hack via SWIFT.

The cyber heist on an Ecuadorian bank in 2016 stands as a striking example of financial fraud leveraging technological
vulnerabilities. Hackers exploited weaknesses in the SWIFT system, orchestrating unauthorised transactions that resulted in
large monetary losses. This incident underscored the pressing need for fortified cybersecurity measures and stringent
compliance protocols within financial networks.

This rise in financial fraud is supported by the BDO report highlighting a surge in financial fraud over five years. The report
sheds light on various fraudulent practices prevalent across industries with 2016 seeing levels of over £2 billion which is up
32%. From embezzlement to Ponzi schemes and accounting fraud, these deceptive manoeuvres not only inflict financial harm
but also corrode trust in financial institutions. This emphasises the urgency for robust compliance measures to counteract
fraudulent activities effectively.

What is Financial Fraud’s Impact?

The reverberations of financial fraud extend beyond immediate monetary losses. It engenders a domino effect, eroding
investor confidence, tarnishing institutional reputations, and destabilising financial systems. Compliance with stringent
regulatory standards becomes paramount to mitigate these risks and fortify defences against the repercussions of fraudulent
activities.

The Value of Fraud

Understanding the intricate dynamics of fraud involves recognizing not just its destructive impact but also the unfortunate
value it holds for perpetrators. Fraudsters often exploit loopholes and vulnerabilities within systems. Manipulating these
weaknesses to their advantage.

Gains for Perpetrators

Financial fraud presents a lucrative opportunity for individuals or organised entities seeking illicit gains. From syphoning off
funds through fraudulent transactions to orchestrating elaborate Ponzi schemes, fraudsters exploit gaps in oversight and
controls to gain financial benefits illegally.

Economic Consequences

While fraud yields gains for perpetrators, its consequences extend beyond individual schemes. The cumulative effect of
widespread fraud diminishes economic growth, deters investment, and disrupts market stability. Such repercussions emphasise
the crucial role of compliance in mitigating the economic fallout of fraudulent activities.
Impact on Compliance

Recognizing the value that fraud holds for those engaging in illicit activities underscores the importance of robust compliance
measures. By understanding the potential gains from fraudulent activities, compliance professionals can plan and fortify
defences to counteract these malevolent endeavours effectively.

Need for Vigilance

Understanding the value that fraud presents emphasises the need for vigilance within financial institutions. It underscores the
need for adopting proactive measures. Practices such as regular audits, robust internal controls, and sophisticated fraud
detection mechanisms. These initiatives are instrumental in disrupting the value chain of fraud, making it more challenging for

perpetrators to exploit vulnerabilities.

So which industries are often hit the hardest?

Fraud in the Banking Sector

Because banks are custodians of financial transactions and repositories; they are prime targets for various forms of fraudulent
activities. The complexity of financial transactions, coupled with the vast amount of sensitive data stored, creates an
environment ripe for exploitation by fraudsters.

Cyber Fraud

The banking sector is particularly vulnerable to cyber fraud due to its heavy reliance on digital systems. Cybercriminals exploit
weaknesses in online banking platforms, phishing attacks, and malware to access sensitive customer information, execute
unauthorised transactions, or compromise the integrity of financial data.

Account Takeover Fraud

Fraudsters use various techniques to take control of bank accounts, often through identity theft or social engineering. Once
access is gained, they can manipulate account details, syphon funds, or conduct fraudulent transactions, causing financial harm
to both customers and institutions.

Payment Fraud

The banking sector faces threats from payment fraud. Fraudsters can manipulate payment processes, forge documents, or
exploit weaknesses in transaction verification systems to illegally divert funds.

Insider Fraud

While banks put in place stringent security measures, insider threats from employees or trusted individuals within the
institution remain a concern. These insiders might misuse their access to perpetrate various forms of fraud, highlighting the
importance of robust internal controls and monitoring mechanisms.

Technology and Fraud in Banking

What is financial fraud in the world of technology? The relationship between technology and the banking sector has
revolutionised financial services, providing convenience and accessibility. Yet, this has also given rise to sophisticated fraud
tactics. Presenting significant challenges for financial crime compliance.
Emergence of Cyber Fraud

Digital banking and online transactions have increased the risk of cyber fraud. Malware, phishing attacks, ransomware, and
social engineering exploit vulnerabilities within banking systems, compromising sensitive customer data and facilitating
fraudulent activities.

Artificial Intelligence and Fraud

While technologies like artificial intelligence (AI) offer immense potential in detecting and preventing fraud through
predictive analytics and pattern recognition, fraudsters also harness AI to devise more intricate and difficult-to-detect schemes.

Mobile Banking Vulnerabilities

The proliferation of mobile banking apps introduces new entry points for fraudsters. Inadequate security measures or
vulnerabilities within these apps can expose customers to identity theft, account takeover, or unauthorised transactions.

Mitigating Financial Fraud Through Education and
Training

Financial fraud remains a persistent menace. It jeopardises the stability and trust within financial ecosystems. Prioritising
education and continuous training serves as a defence mechanism against fraudulent activities. By embracing a proactive
stance, individuals and institutions can reinforce their resilience against financial fraud. Thus safeguarding the integrity and
credibility of global financial systems.

So where can you go to learn protective measures?

In light of the escalating threat posed by financial fraud, professionals operating within the financial landscape must bolster
their expertise in compliance measures. Combating financial fraud necessitates a proactive approach embedded within
compliance practices. Robust internal controls, meticulous due diligence, and fostering a culture of ethical conduct are
indispensable. Education and training like the Financial Crime Compliance courses by Redcliffe Training empower
professionals with insights into regulatory frameworks and risk assessment methodologies.

FAQ
What is the penalty for financial fraud in the UK?

The penalty for financial fraud in the UK can vary based on the severity of the offence. It may include imprisonment for a term
ranging from months to several years, hefty fines, community service, or a combination of these penalties. The specific

consequences depend on the nature and scale of the fraud, the amount of money involved, and other relevant factors.

Do banks go after fraudsters?

Yes, banks often pursue legal action against fraudsters. Banks have dedicated departments that investigate and handle cases of
fraud. They work closely with law enforcement agencies to identify, track down, and prosecute individuals involved in
fraudulent activities to cut losses and protect their customers. Banks take fraud seriously and use various measures. These

include surveillance, fraud detection systems, and legal recourse, to combat fraudulent activities.


--- End of financial fraud.pdf ---
--- Start of education.pdf ---
Learning about various financial topics—personal finance, saving and investing, buying a
home, retirement planning, the stock and bond markets, tax-shielding strategies, to name
a few—is essential to well-informed, successful financial decision-making. Financial
literacy is a key to achieving important financial goals over the course of your entire life.

What are the best resources for improving your financial literacy? How can you take your
financial know-how to the next level? We're partial to a certain finance website, of course,
but the reality is that there are a number of tools that are well worth your time.

Here are some resources that we recommend you explore.

KEY TAKEAWAYS

e« Books and magazines remain a great way to delve into financial topics, although
it’s important to find a publication geared toward your experience and learning
level.

e The past few years have seen a proliferation of personal finance podcasts that
can help you hone your money-management skills in your spare time.

e Libraries and civic centers sometimes host presentations by local financial
professionals that are geared to novice investors.

¢ Financial professionals themselves and/or financial firms also offer financial
education opportunities.

¢ Financial websites (including Investopedia) are another powerful and convenient
resource for financial education.

Find a Good Book

For anyone trying to build their financial literacy, one place to start is with a good book.
The big advantages of print are that you can go at your own pace and focus on the topics
that interest you the most. Most public libraries should have a sizeable selection of
publications on financial topics.

Here are some highly regarded titles to start you off.

Personal Finance for Dummies

Sure, opening up a book designed for “dummies” takes some humility, but those who dig
through author Eric Tyson’s expansive tome are usually rewarded. At almost 500 pages,
Tyson covers it all—from budgeting and investing in mutual funds to understanding
different types of insurance. Other topics include cryptocurrency, technology, and even
how to thwart identity theft. Don’t expect a deep dive into every topic. However, for a quick
introduction to key concepts, it’s a good place to start. !

Your Money or Your Life

This book by Vicki Robin and Joe Dominguez defined the financial independence, retire
early (FIRE) movement often tied to the millennial generation. The main goal of FIRE is to
save 25 times annual expenses and to withdraw 4% as retirement income. This savings
goal requires a very frugal lifestyle and a firm commitment to the system. The book was
fully revised in 2018 and is a great financial literacy resource for the topic of personal
finance.

| Will Teach You to Be Rich

When a book on finances is described as breezy and irreverent, one might think it not
worth reading. In this case, one might be wrong. Ramit Sethi's self-described "no guilt, no
excuses, no BS, just a 6-week program that works" quickly became a New York

Times and Wall Street Journal bestseller. It's a go-to resource that coaches readers to
earn more, save more, and live a rich life. The revised 2019 second edition teaches you
how to choose the right accounts and investments so that your money grows for you—
automatically. 3

Subscribe to a Newspaper or Magazine

With so much great content available on the web, forking over money for a print
newspaper or magazine might seem antiquated. Still, finding a publication in your mailbox
every day, week, or month may keep you from falling off the finance wagon for too long.

In addition, newspapers and magazines have a way of introducing you to topics and ideas
that you might not have sought out on your own. Below are some of the best when it
comes to developing your financial acumen.
The Wall Street Journal

One of the leading daily newspapers in the world, the Wall Street Journal has covered
business, financial, and economic news since its founding in 1889.4 For those seeking to
improve their financial literacy, this newspaper (available as a digital version, as well)
provides extensive daily coverage of business news, economic events, investing, and the
markets.

Kiplinger

There are other publications that offer personal finance information, but Kiplinger is the
only print magazine left that’s focused entirely on investing and money management.
Unlike a number of other finance publications clearly geared toward business readers,
Kiplinger has always focused on clear-cut advice for everyday investors. Published
monthly, it contains articles on investments, tax strategies, estate planning, and more.

 

Barron’s

For someone with a fairly strong grasp of how markets work, Barron’s is a great tool for
tracking specific industries and companies. The weekly magazine offers stock picks,
breakdowns of top-selling mutual funds, and other actionable content designed to give
active investors an edge.

The Economist

Compared to the other publications on this list, The Economist is a monthly that casts a
broader net. Readers will find articles on economics as well as politics, technology, and
the arts. It’s not the straightforward advice-based content you'll find in, say, Kiplinger. But
for readers hoping to get a sense of events shaping the global markets, this U.K.-based
magazine is a treasure.

Bookmark a Website

There is an enormous amount of content online for those who want to improve their
financial literacy. However, where to spend your valuable time is the question. Here are
some suggested sites to start with.

Financial Literacy Resource Directory

Developed by the U.S. Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, this directory provides
consumers with a great opportunity to explore a large selection of financial literacy
resources arranged by topic. Visitors can find an assortment of educational resources on
basic financial capability, credit management, home buying, retirement and financial
security, and financial literacy programs/toolkits for youths.

 
Betterlnvesting

BetterInvesting was established by the National Association of Investors (NAIC). The
mission of the NAIC is to offer individuals an unbiased investing education. It focuses on
providing information and useful online stock analysis tools that help people to learn about
investing and reach financial goals. Its many resources include articles, classes, stock
reports, publications, investor clubs, and webinars.

American Association of Individual Investors

AAIl is a membership organization that's dedicated to providing individual investors with
the information they need to make informed investment decisions and reach important
financial objectives. Some may consider it most useful for those with investment
experience, although its target market includes novices. AAIl's website and monthly
journal are packed with information about a range of topics, from coverage of current
events, investing for beginners, and personal finance to stocks, bond, mutual funds, ETFs,
dividend reinvesting, retirement income, tax strategies, and much more.

 

Investor.gov

Investor.gov is a site under the aegis of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. It
provides visitors with an in-depth introduction to investing, financial tools and calculators,
guidance on protecting yourself and your investments from fraud, coverage of financial
events in the news and guidance for dealing with their effects, money tips, competitions,
and games for students, and more.

Tune in to a Podcast

Whether you're in the car, going for a jog, or doing work around the house, podcasts are
an easy way to absorb some financial ed and money-management tips without a lot of
effort. The podcast landscape is pretty crowded, so you’re bound to stumble upon some
worthwhile shows. Here are a few of our favorites, in addition to The Investopedia
Express, Editor-in-Chief Caleb Silver's weekly take on all things financial.

"Everyone's Talkin' Money"

A certified financial planner turned podcaster, Shannah Compton Game's goal is to help
people learn to see money as a tool they can use to create the life they want for
themselves. Originally called "Millennial Money," Game has re-focused her podcast to
ensure that all, from the inexperienced to those ready to retire, get critical financial
information explained in ways that are easy to understand and act upon. The podcast
features topics like how to start building wealth on any budget, how to get rid of debt, the
need-to-knows about student loan forgiveness, and creating passive income streams. °®
"Money Girl"

This show, hosted by Laura D. Adams, "has been downloaded more than 42 million times
by legions of loyal fans." Laura's forté is applicable advice and tips in about 20 minutes per
week that listeners can implement immediately. Inspiration for "Money Girl" podcasts
comes from current events, social media, listener questions, and Laura's conversations
with her friends. The variety makes it easy and fun for listeners to understand complex
personal finance topics. "Money Girl" can be heard for free on the "Money Girl" blog and
on many apps, including Apple Podcasts, Spotify, and the Stitcher app. ’

"Planet Money"

Those seeking a better understanding of what’s going on with the economy will probably
find NPR's "Planet Money" a great starting point. The podcast likes to take recent news
stories—the development of a COVID-19 vaccine or trade wars with China, for example—
and give them added context. The show doesn’t always take aim at the big headlines,
though. ® One episode tackled the plausibility of the television show The

Simpsons through the lens of the economics of the modern middle class American family.
9 |f you’re curious about all things economics, this may be for you.

"The His and Her Money Show"

Learn the basics of marriage, money, and financial independence with Talaat and Tai
McNeely and their guests, who include Dave Ramsey. The podcast covers a wide range of
topics including credit, debt, saving money, investments, real estate, earning money from
side hustles, tax deductions, and even making money from your car. 10

Explore Community Events

In-person and virtual events are another opportunity to increase your financial literacy and
start making wiser choices with your money. Public libraries, for example, sometimes host
seminars led by local financial professionals. Financial firms also periodically offer
financial and investment seminars. Many of these events feature question-and-answer
sessions in which you can get personalized advice on a specific financial scenario you're
facing.

There are also a number of community-oriented financial literacy programs around the
country aimed at low- and middle-income adults that include budgeting and investment
classes. Some offer free counseling sessions for eligible participants, in which you can talk
one on one with a financial coach.

What's Financial Literacy?

Financial literacy is the ability to understand and use financial concepts such as saving,
investing, and debt management. While these three concepts are the bedrock of financial
literacy, each leads to other financial topics, all of which contribute to more in-depth
knowledge and skill.

What Are the Key Components of Financial Literacy?

There are five key components of financial literacy, according to the Financial Literacy and
Education Commission: Earn, spend, save and invest, borrow, and protect. 11

Why Is Financial Literacy Important?

Financial literacy is vitally important because it represents financial knowledge, and
financial knowledge is power. The more that you learn and understand (about topics such
as saving and investing, budgeting, borrowing money, investing, retirement planning, and
more), the better able you'll be to take advantage of opportunities to improve your current
financial well-being and your future financial security.

The Bottom Line

Improving your financial literacy is a must in order to possess and build on the knowledge
you need to develop healthy money habits and invest wisely. Books, magazines, and
financially-focused websites abound. With the growth of podcasts, and other digital media,
there are more places than ever to get the valuable information that can enhance your
financial literacy.


--- End of education.pdf ---
